Mr Ischinger, Ladies and gentlemen,
I’m delighted to be participating in this forum today, which is quite extraordinary in many ways – first and foremost because we are experiencing a pandemic and it has never been necessary before to have a virtual forum of this nature rather than a physical conference.
Let me start by going back to my speech two years ago when I referred to Alexander von Humboldt, who was convinced that “everything is interaction”. Essentially, therefore, he pointed out centuries ago that what we call multilateralism today, namely cooperation, should form the basis for our political actions. I believe that the last two years have brought home to us once more that a commitment to multilateralism is both right and important.
The fight against the pandemic has highlighted this in an unprecedented fashion. Mr Tedros from the World Health Organization reminded us today that if not everyone is vaccinated, if the virus is not defeated all over the world, then none of us will be safe, no one can truly be kept safe from the virus. We will be confronted with mutations time and again. The equitable and swift distribution of vaccines to everyone in the world is therefore one of our main tasks. During the recent G7 meeting, Germany pledged an additional 1.5 billion euro for the ACT-Accelerator and, in particular, for the COVAX vaccine facility. We’ve therefore now made pledges to the tune of 2.5 billion dollars for this programme; and we’ve done so out of conviction.
Alongside the fight against the pandemic, we of course also face major challenges regarding the climate and biodiversity, the fight against terrorism and – with even greater urgency than before – the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. We will only master and achieve all of this if we join forces in all spheres and regard security – and this was made ever clearer many years ago at the Munich Security Conference thanks to you, Mr Ischinger – as a concept of networked security, of multidimensional security.
The prospects for multilateralism are much better now than they were two years ago. This has very much to do with the fact that Joe Biden is now the President of the United States of America. His speech a few minutes ago, as well as his Administration’s first announcements, have convinced us that these are not just mere words and that action has been taken. The return to the Paris Agreement, the return to the World Health Organization, the cooperation in the UN Human Rights Council, the extension of the New START Treaty, as well as the readiness to revive the nuclear agreement with Iran – all of these are important steps towards greater multilateral cooperation.
I can only support what he said – democracies should not only talk about freedom and values but also deliver results and help others to succeed around the world. In Germany we have a saying: “There’s no good unless one does it.” That’s the agenda before us now. Of course, transatlantic cooperation plays a key role in this. What does that mean for Germany as a country which has always supported the transatlantic partnership, and as a European Union member state? It means that we have to continue our commitment in all spheres. We also have to take action where a special effort is required. Making a special effort sometimes also means going the extra mile. I believe we’ve made good progress in this respect during the last few years.
In Wales back in 2014, when we spoke about the two percent target for defence expenditure, we pledged to work towards this goal. I can say that this year our spending has risen to 1.5 percent, compared to 1.1 percent in 2014. Naturally, we are still committed to reaching the two percent target and continue to work towards it.
However, what we contribute to the transatlantic partnership is of course also important. I’d like to point out that Germany has been in Afghanistan for the last 18 years in a crucial area, in the north of the country, helping to safeguard or create stability. I’m very grateful that the US Administration is now reassessing the peace process in Afghanistan. Germany is willing to remain longer in Afghanistan if this helps ensure the success of the mission and if it enables us to help the democratic, the peace-loving forces in Afghanistan, ensuring that they have a real chance of prevailing. The withdrawal of troops must not result in the wrong forces gaining the upper hand in the country.
We’re a framework nation in Lithuania. We’re taking part in the fight against Islamist terrorism. We’re engaged in Iraq.
Germany is committed on the one hand to NATO as the central transatlantic pillar, and to European defence policy on the other. In our view, these two elements complement each other. They’re not mutually exclusive. Rather they supplement each other and belong together.
Of course, there are matters of very special importance to us in the European Union, matters which affect our interests. These include our commitment in Africa or Syria’s future. We have to realise that this is all about countries on the European Union’s doorstep and that we’re therefore especially affected by what happens there. In the last few years, Germany has increased its commitment in Africa, although we have to admit that France bears the lion’s share of the burden here. Nevertheless, we are involved in the UN MINUSMA mission as well as the European mission to train the armed forces in Mali and now also in the Niger. We’re also supporting the G5 Sahel initiative. And I would like to discuss with the United States of America once more whether we should support these countries in the fight against terrorism by jointly adopting a United Nations Chapter VII mandate. For that would provide these countries with greater support and assistance in their very difficult fight against Islamist terrorism. I believe that the relationship with Africa is of such strategic importance that it should be a key issue in the transatlantic discussion. 
One of the central points when it comes to defeating Islamist terrorism is also the question of how things will develop in Libya. Germany has assumed greater diplomatic responsibility here. I’m glad to say that the UN process has resulted in some successes. However, we shouldn’t be naive. For there is still a quite considerable danger that Libya will, as it were, become a pawn of major proxy powers and that the country won’t belong to its people or have a political future. The European Union is providing assistance but I believe that the transatlantic partnership should also seek to ensure that Libya and its people have a future.
We also have to advance the constitutional process in Syria – likewise under the auspices of the United Nations. For in Syria, too, there can only be a peaceful solution if the many people who had to leave the country have a political future there. 
Naturally, we will also work together very closely on the JCPOA, the nuclear agreement with Iran. I hope that we can ensure that this agreement has a chance of succeeding.
Beyond that, the transatlantic partnership has two major tasks for which we have to devise joint strategies.
Firstly, I’m referring to relations with Russia. We haven’t made any headway in the last few years on the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. Although the Minsk process is a diplomatic instrument, the progress made has been less than satisfactory. Russia has repeatedly embroiled European Union member states in hybrid conflicts. It’s therefore crucial that we draw up a joint transatlantic agenda on Russia which, on the one hand, contains offers of cooperation and, on the other, clearly spells out the differences. I fully agree with the American President about the need for a strong European Union: unfortunately, Russia is doing nothing to foster that at the present time.
The second and perhaps more complex matter is that we need to devise a joint agenda on China. On the one hand, China is a systemic competitor. On the other, we need China to help resolve global problems, for instance those relating to biodiversity or climate change mitigation. During the last few years, China has gained more clout on the international stage. We as a transatlantic alliance and as the world’s democracies need to take action to bring our own weight to bear. That’s why, for example, the question of supplying vaccines to developing countries is important. It’s vital that vaccines are not only supplied by China and Russia and that we ask ourselves what we can do via COVAX and also what can the G7 do as a multilateral community to foster the vaccination rollout in developing countries, especially in Africa. 
What’s more, we have to make multilateral organisations such as the World Bank, the World Trade Organization, the World Health Organization or the International Monetary Fund strong again. Wherever we’ve been weak and where we were unable to decide quickly enough to make changes or increase capital, subsidiary or other structures have emerged in the Asian region, often led by China. We have to devise appropriate responses and to convince others with our actions.
We have to work together to define the strategic challenges. I believe the agenda is clear; and it’s also clear that we have to develop joint approaches. That doesn’t mean that our interests will always converge – I have no illusions about that; we also have to speak frankly about our differences. However, our basic approach, our shared values, our convictions, our democracy and its capability to act have provided us with a good, common foundation. We have to show that our intention is not to make countries dependent on us. Rather, we want to convince countries of the advantages of our way of living and of our way of conducting politics. 
For me, the transatlantic perspective lies at the heart of these efforts. I can only say: much remains to be done. Germany is ready for a new chapter in the transatlantic partnership. And I’m delighted to have this opportunity to say that today at this Munich Security Conference forum.
Thank you very much.

Fellow citizens,
The coronavirus is changing daily life in our country dramatically at the present. Our idea of normality, of public life, social togetherness - all of this is being put to the test as never before.
Millions of you cannot go to work, your children cannot go to school or kindergarten, theatres and cinemas and shops are closed, and, perhaps what is most difficult, we all miss social encounters that we otherwise take for granted. Of course, each of us has many questions and concerns in a situation like this, about the days ahead.
I’m addressing you in this unconventional way today because I want to tell you what guides me as Federal Chancellor and all my colleagues in the Federal Government in this situation. This is part of what open democracy is about: that we make political decisions transparent and explain them. That we justify and communicate our actions as best we can, so that people are able to understand them.
I firmly believe that we will pass this test if all citizens genuinely see this as THEIR task.
Allow me therefore to say that this is serious. Please also take this seriously. Since German reunification, no, since the Second World War, there has not been a challenge for our country in which action in a spirit of solidarity on our part was so important.
I would like explain where we currently stand in this epidemic and what the Federal Government and the state levels are doing to protect everyone in our community and to limit the economic, social and cultural fallout. However, I also want to tell you why all of you are needed here, and what each and every individual can do to help.
As far as the epidemic is concerned – and everything I tell you about this comes from the Federal Government’s ongoing consultations with the experts from the Robert Koch Institute and other scientists and virologists: the most intensive research is being conducted around the world, but there is still neither a way to treat the coronavirus, nor is there a vaccine.
As long as this is the case – and this is what is guiding all of our actions – then only one thing matters, namely that we slow the spread of the virus, flatten the curve over the course of several months and buy time. Time in which the research community can develop a medicine and vaccine. But, above all, time to allow those who fall ill to receive the best possible treatment.
Germany has an excellent healthcare system, perhaps one of the best in the world. We can take solace in this. But our hospitals would also be completely overwhelmed if, in the shortest space of time, too many patients were admitted, suffering severe symptoms as a result of the virus.
These are not just abstract numbers in statistics, but this is about a father or grandfather, a mother or grandmother, a partner – this is about people. And we are a community in which each life and each person counts.
I would like first of all to address all those who as doctors, nurses or in a different capacity work in our hospitals and in our healthcare system in general. You are on the front lines of this fight for us. You are the first to see the sick and to see how severe the symptoms of the virus can sometimes be. And, day in, day out, you keep going back to work and are there to help people. You are doing tremendous work, and I would like to thank you from the bottom of my heart.
So, our aim is to slow the virus down as it makes its way through Germany. And we must, and this is absolutely vital, focus our attention on one thing above all else, namely powering down public life as far as possible. With reason and a sense of proportion, of course, since the state will continue to function. It goes without saying that supply chains will continue to be guaranteed, and we want to keep as much economic activity going as possible.
But we must now reduce everything that could put people at risk, everything that could harm not only individuals, but also the community. We must limit the risk of one person infecting another as much as we possibly can.
I know how dramatic the restrictions already are: no events, no trade fairs, no concerts any more, and, for the time being, also no school, no university, no kindergarten, no more playing at the playground. I know how invasive the closures that the Federation and the Länder have agreed to are in our lives, and also in terms of how we see ourselves as a democracy. These are restrictions, the likes of which the Federal Republic has never seen before.
Allow me to assure you that, for someone like me, for whom the freedom of travel and the freedom of movement were a hard-fought right, such restrictions can only be justified if they are absolutely imperative. These should never be put in place lightly in a democracy and should only be temporary. - But they are vital at the moment in order to save lives.
This is why, since the beginning of the week, more intensive border controls and restrictions on entry for a number of our most important neighbouring countries have been in force.
Things are already very difficult for the economy, for major companies, and also for small businesses, for shops, restaurants and freelancers. Things will get even more difficult in the weeks to come.
I assure you that the Federal Government is doing everything that it can to cushion the economic impact - and, above all, to safeguard jobs.
We can and we will do whatever it takes in order to help our companies and their employees get through this most difficult time.
And everyone can rest assured that the food supply is guaranteed at all times, and that if supermarket shelves happen to be empty on one day, they will be filled again on the next. I want to tell everyone going to the supermarket that bulk-buying makes sense; it always has. But only within reason. Panic buying, as if there’s no tomorrow, is pointless and, at the end of the day, shows a complete lack of solidarity.
And allow me to express my thanks to those who are too seldom thanked. Those working as supermarket cashiers or restocking shelves, who are currently doing one of the most difficult jobs that there are at the moment. Thank you for being there for your fellow citizens and for keeping us all going.
Let me talk now about what I believe is most urgent today. All measures taken by the state would come to nothing if we were to fail to use the most effective means for preventing the virus from spreading too rapidly – and that is we ourselves. As indiscriminately as each one of us can be affected by the virus, each and every one of us must help. First and foremost, by taking seriously what matters today. Not panicking, but also not thinking for a single moment that he or she doesn’t matter after all. No one is expendable. Everyone counts, and we need a collective effort.
That is the message an epidemic brings home – how vulnerable we all are, how much we depend on the considerate behaviour of others and, ultimately, how, through joint action, we can protect ourselves and offer one another encouragement and support.
Every individual counts. We are not condemned to accept the spread of this virus as an inevitable fact of life. We have the means to fight it. We must be considerate and keep a safe distance from one another. Virologists are giving us clear advice: no more handshakes, we must wash our hands thoroughly and often, and we must keep at least one and a half metre’s distance between ourselves and others. Ideally, we should avoid all contact with the elderly, because they are particularly at risk.
I know that this is asking a great deal of us. Especially when times are hard, we want to be close to one another. We show affection by staying close, and by reaching out to each other. But at this time, we must do the exact opposite. Every single one of us must understand that, right now, the only way to show we care is by keeping our distance.
A well-meant visit or a trip that is not essential can spread infection and really should not take place right now. There is a reason why experts say that grandparents and grandchildren should not come into contact with each other right now.
Everyone who avoids unnecessary encounters helps all those who are in hospitals providing care to more and more people each day. So that is how we will save lives. This will be difficult for many, and it will also be important not to abandon anyone and to take care of all those who need a dose of cheer and encouragement. As families, and as a society, we will find other ways to help each other.
Even now, we have come up with many creative ideas for standing up to this virus and its impact on society. Even now, grandchildren are recording podcasts for their grandparents, letting them know they are not alone.
We all must discover how we can show affection and express friendship. We are staying in touch via Skype, phone, email, and maybe also by writing old-fashioned letters. The post, after all, is being delivered. We’re hearing about beautiful examples of neighbours helping one another. People are assisting the elderly who cannot themselves go shopping. I am certain there’s plenty more we can do. We will prove, as a community, that we will not abandon one another.
I therefore urge you to abide by the rules that will remain in place for the time being. The government will constantly reassess what measures can be adjusted and also what further measures may still be necessary.
This is a developing situation, and we will ensure that we continue to learn from it so that we can adjust our thinking and deploy new instruments at any time. If we do so, then we will explain our reasons once again.
Therefore, I call on you to not believe any rumours, but rather only the official messages that we will always translate into many languages.
We are a democracy. We thrive not because we are forced to do something, but because we share knowledge and encourage active participation. This is a historic task, and it can only be mastered if we face it together.
I have absolutely no doubt that we will overcome this crisis. But how many victims will it claim? How many loved ones will we lose? The answer, to a great extent, lies in our hands. Right now, we can take decisive action all together. We can accept these current limitations and support one another.
The situation is serious, and the outcome uncertain.
Our success will also largely depend on how disciplined each and every one of us is in following the rules.
Even though this is something we have never experienced before, we must show that we can act warm-heartedly and rationally – and thereby save lives. It is up to each and every one of us to do so, without any exception.
Take good care of yourself and your loved ones.
Thank you.
Mr President,
Madam President of the Commission,
Distinguished colleagues at the European Parliament,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is my pleasure to address the plenary of the European Parliament at the beginning of the German Presidency of the Council of the EU. Like most of you, I too have missed meeting people in person, and talking to them face to face.
This is my first trip abroad since the start of the pandemic, and it is no coincidence that it has brought me to you, to the heart of European democracy. We need the European Parliament now as the European Union seeks to emerge strengthened from this crisis.
The tasks ahead of us are tremendous. They require tremendous exertions. They need parliamentary debate, they need political mediation, they need cultural transposition into our various countries and regions. This is where you are needed. It is thus my special honour to present to you today the priorities of the German Council Presidency.
Five issues are particularly important to me at this time: our fundamental rights, cohesion, climate change, digitalisation and Europe’s responsibility in the world. These five issues are important because we must lastingly transform Europe if we want to protect it and preserve it. For only then will Europe be able to play a sovereign and responsible role of its own in a rapidly changing global order.
We are all aware that my visit today takes place against the backdrop of the greatest test the European Union has ever faced. The worldwide COVID-19 pandemic has had a serious and unforgiving impact on people in Europe, too. It has claimed more than 100,000 lives in Europe alone. Many people were not even able to say goodbye to their loved ones in their final hours because of the strict quarantine rules. This grief for the departed, the pain left by impossible farewells, will never be forgotten, no matter how hard we work to start again, no matter how dedicated we are to economic recovery. These feelings will remain with us for a long time to come.
Our economy has been struck a heavy blow across Europe. The reverberations continue to shake us. Millions of workers have lost their jobs. Many EU citizens have come to fear for their livelihoods, in addition to fearing for their health and the health of their families. They now all need our joint support.
In order to break chains of infection, temporary restrictions had to be placed on the most elementary fundamental rights. This was a very high price to pay, since generations of Europeans had fought hard to win these fundamental rights. Human rights and civil liberties are the most valuable possessions we have in Europe. They may only be restricted for very good reason and for the shortest time possible. A pandemic must never be used as an excuse to undermine democratic principles.
All European countries have their varying collective memories of their own historic upheavals, of diverse battles for freedom and the rule of law. And yet we are united by precisely this achievement of fundamental rights in Europe. Speaking for myself, as someone who lived 35 years under a system that denied its citizens freedom, the decision to limit these rights during the pandemic was one that I found immensely hard to take.
It is in this historic phase that Germany takes over the Council Presidency. I have great respect for this task, but also a great passion for it. For I trust in Europe. I am a firm believer in Europe – not just as our heritage, but as providing hope and vision for the future.
Europe is not just our destiny, a legacy that has been passed on to us, imposing obligations. Europe is a living entity that we can shape and transform. Europe does not deprive us of any options. In a globalised world, it is Europe that gives us our options in the first place! We will be able to preserve our beliefs and our freedoms with Europe – and not without it.
That is why we now need to be guided more than ever by fundamental rights, and why mutual support and communitarian cohesion are so vital. Europe will only remain Europe if it is guided by these principles in its work to find innovative solutions to the challenges of climate change and digital transformation, and shoulders its responsibility in the world.
These are huge tasks, but I am confident. Just think of the tests and trials that Europe has already survived. Recall for example the failure of the Constitution for Europe 15 years ago, and the economic and financial crises, about which we argued so fiercely. Or think of the refugee flows we saw five years ago. Things have never been easy. Injuries have always been suffered. But even the most bitter crises have helped us to better understand each other’s needs and struggles. We have learned together.
Europe has overcome all these crises because ultimately everyone knew what was indispensable: fundamental rights and cohesion. Human rights and civil liberties, the inviolability of human dignity, free development of the individual’s personal, political and social being, protection from discrimination and disdain, and equality – not just theoretical but lived equality – these form the ethico-political foundation on which Europe is built. These are the rights that everyone is entitled to. They don’t apply more to some people and less to others. They don’t apply to some people all of the time and to others only some of the time. They apply to everyone. Full stop.
That is Europe’s promise. We must live up to this promise by ensuring that citizens really can be free to live according to their religious beliefs, their cultural or political convictions, that they may pursue their own idea of happiness or the good life.
European democracy, like any democracy, thrives on public, critical debate. A democracy in which opposition voices are unwanted, a democracy in which social or cultural and religious diversity are unwanted, is no democracy at all.
The pandemic has shown us all very clearly how precious fundamental rights are, how elementary the freedoms are that they guarantee. Strong institutions monitor the protection of these fundamental rights in the European Union: the European Commission, the European Court of Justice and the European Parliament. Fundamental rights are the first issue close to my heart during this Presidency.
They must be bolstered and supplemented by the second principle that makes Europe what it is: cohesion. Europe will only emerge strengthened from this crisis if we are willing, in spite of all our differences, to find joint solutions, and if we are willing to see the world through each other’s eyes and to be understanding of each other’s perspectives. Europe will be stronger than ever after the crisis if we strengthen our community spirit. Nobody will get through this crisis on their own. We are all vulnerable. European solidarity is not just a humane gesture, but a lasting investment. European cohesion is not just a political imperative, but also something that will pay off.
It is also the leitmotif of our Council Presidency: “Together for Europe’s recovery.” Together with the Federal Government, I will devote myself passionately to this task.
But I need you. To protect this community spirit within the EU, we need the European Parliament. For you are the people who generate and communicate the mutual understanding we need to reach compromises. You represent almost 450 million citizens in 27 states. You translate European principles for your constituents. You explain Europe to the people, and thereby mediate between Brussels, Strasbourg and your home regions. You not only communicate in 24 languages. You also live with this diversity of perspectives and experience. Who if not you can explain to the people in Europe what makes other member states tick?
It is for this reason that I ask you, as mediators and communicators of cohesion, for your support in these difficult times. Help us deepen our mutual understanding. Help us strengthen Europe’s cohesion.
The German Presidency’s top priority is to see Europe emerge from the crisis united and stronger. But we don’t merely want to stabilise Europe for the short term. That would be too little. What we want is a Europe that gives grounds for hope. We want a Europe that tackles the tasks at hand courageously and with self-assurance. We want a Europe that is capable of coping with the future, that holds its own in the world in an innovative and sustainable manner. We want a new beginning for Europe.
This resolve was the springboard for the Franco-German initiative of mid-May. Together with French President Emmanuel Macron, I proposed a €500 billion recovery fund for Europe. I am pleased that the European Commission is incorporating many aspects of this Franco-German initiative into its proposal for the Multiannual Financial Framework and the recovery programme. Discussions on this basis are currently ongoing in the European Council under the leadership of Charles Michel.
Our common goal is to reach agreement as quickly as possible. Because the extent of the blow to the economy calls for rapid action. There is no time to lose – only the weakest would suffer. I very much hope that we manage to reach an agreement before the end of the summer. That will require a considerable readiness to compromise from all sides – including you.
The situation is exceptional – in fact, unprecedented in the history of the European Union. That is why Germany has advocated an exceptional and unprecedented exertion, to the tune of €500 billion. What is important now is that we as Europe reach agreement.
I am convinced that the social dimension is just as decisive as the economic one. A socially and economically just Europe is crucial for democratic cohesion. It is the best way to counter all those who seek to weaken our democracies and question all that binds us together.
For that reason, too, we will focus particularly on young people and children during our Presidency. They are the future of Europe, and they are especially hard hit by the crisis. So, among other things, we want to support their development with a European Youth Work Agenda and actively assist them as they embark on working life with an enhanced Youth Guarantee.
We mustn’t be naive. In many member states, the Eurosceptics are just waiting to misuse the crisis for their own ends. We must now show them all exactly what the added value of cooperation within the European Union is. We need to show them that a return to nationalism means not more, but less control, and that only joint action by Europe as a whole can protect and strengthen us.
That is why it is important and right that those regions that have been particularly hard hit by the crisis, and especially the people who live there, can count on our solidarity. This is in our own fundamental interest. At the same time, however, this also means that the exertion needed now for the good of all must not excessively burden only the economically strong member states. Rather, each and every one of us is called on to put ourselves in the other’s position. So bear in mind what individual member states can contribute, and what they cannot – in economic, social and political terms. Today I appeal to you as members of the European Parliament and ask for your support in all these endeavours. I firmly believe that everyone is ready to demonstrate exceptional solidarity in this crisis. Germany certainly is.
Efforts to overcome the pandemic and its repercussions will shape our Council Presidency. At the same time, we must constantly keep an eye on the other major challenges of our age, challenges which have not gone away. These are the third, fourth and fifth issues that will be crucial for Europe.
Firstly, climate change. About half a year ago, EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen presented her climate programme to this house. Her remarks to you were compelling as she stressed that Europe needed to act now if our planet were to remain viable. I, too, am convinced that a global solution to climate change will only be possible if Europe plays a pioneering role in climate protection. The European Commission’s strategy for a Green Deal is therefore an important guideline for us. Following it closely during our Presidency, we want to manage the transition to a carbon-neutral economy and society and to a green economy with strong and innovative companies – an economy which will safeguard and strengthen key life resources and Europe’s competitiveness for future generations.
It is important to me in this context that we enshrine Europe’s aim to be climate neutral by 2050 in legislation. And so I welcome the European Commission’s proposal, as an interim step, of reducing emissions to 50 to 55% of 1990 levels by 2030. With this aim in mind, we will support the work on the European Climate Law.
Another major challenge, and the fourth issue of particular importance to us during our Presidency, is the digital transformation. Like climate change mitigation, it requires us to sustainably change the way we live and do business. This makes many people scared – scared of losing all that is familiar, and scared at the speed of change. Understandably.
But let me say this quite clearly: the commitment to digitalisation, like the commitment to climate change mitigation, does not mean abandoning all that we have built up and thus risking the jobs of millions of Europeans. On the contrary: this is a necessary transformation of our society which will bring greater protection and sustainability in the long term. Because the past few weeks and months have once again highlighted Europe’s digital dependence on third countries. Many of us have seen this beyond any doubt in our day-to-day digital communication, in relation to either technology or services. It is important that Europe become digitally sovereign. We want to make progress, particularly in key areas such as artificial intelligence and quantum computing, but also in the development of a trustworthy and secure digital infrastructure.
Protecting our democracies effectively from cyber threats and disinformation campaigns is also vital. Because a democracy needs a public arena in which knowledge and information can be shared and where people can enter into discussion and agree on how they want to live. Right now we see how the pandemic cannot be tackled with lies and disinformation, or with hatred and hate speech. Fact-denying populism is being shown its limits. Truth and transparency are needed in a democracy. That is what characterises Europe, and that is what Germany will champion during its Presidency of the Council of the EU.
The fifth issue is Europe’s responsibility in a globalised world. A glance at the map will show that Europe is surrounded on its external borders not only by the United Kingdom and the Western Balkans but also by countries including Russia, Belarus, Ukraine, Turkey, Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Israel, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco. At the same time, we are living in an age of global upheaval, when the patterns of power are shifting and Europe, even though many member states are part of the transatlantic alliance, is fending more for itself.
We can and must decide for ourselves what Europe wants to be in this rapidly changing global order. Whether we are serious about Europe and whether we want a Europe that retains its freedom and its identity even in the age of globalisation are more important questions now than ever. A situation like this calls for a strong European Foreign and Security Policy.
The United Kingdom is and will remain an important partner in this context. Shaping our future partnership will occupy us a great deal over the next six months. Progress in the negotiations has been – to put it mildly – modest. We have agreed with the United Kingdom that we will speed up the negotiations so as to reach an agreement before the end of the autumn, which would then have to be ratified by the end of the year. I will continue to work for a good solution. But we should also make plans in case no agreement is reached after all.
During our Presidency, we should do our utmost to make progress in three other areas of foreign policy as well: firstly, the accession conference at least with North Macedonia, perhaps Albania too – an important step towards giving the countries of the Western Balkans a prospect of EU accession – and, secondly, our relations with our neighbouring continent Africa and the African Union, which we want to intensify for the future at an EU-Africa Summit. This will still include issues relating to cooperation on migration. There are more displaced persons than ever before. That is why we bear a special responsibility to move forward on asylum and migration policy, an issue so crucial for Europe. This question requires much political sensitivity, but we must not look away; rather, we have to face up to this humanitarian and political task together.
Thirdly, and not least of all, we will be addressing our strategic relations with China, which are characterised by close trade links but equally by very different approaches to social policy, particularly respect for human rights and the rule of law. Even if the EU-China Summit unfortunately cannot take place in September, we want to continue the open dialogue with China.
During our Presidency of the Council of the EU, we also intend to continue our deliberations on whether or not we want to retain the principle of unanimity in matters of foreign and security policy and what lessons Europe can learn from the corona crisis, for example with thoughts on how Europe’s sovereignty in the health sector could be strengthened. We should conduct this debate at a Conference on the Future of Europe, which was proposed by the European Commission last year and for which you developed many ideas with your resolutions. I would urge that such a Conference concentrate on just a few issues, promising concrete results and bringing citizens from and in different member states together for discussions. I have already talked about this today with the President of the European Parliament, David Sassoli.
Mr President, Madam President of the Commission, ladies and gentlemen, do we want Europe? Then we need what I have spoken about today. Then we need fundamental rights and cohesion. Then we need answers to climate change and digitalisation. Then we need Europe’s responsibility in the world. Then we need to make Europe greener, more digital and thus more innovative and more competitive. Because Europe should be regarded internationally as an advocate of an order of justice, of innovation and sustainability. That is the vision for Europe.
Allow me to conclude with a personal remark. I am a music lover. And so I am delighted that a very special anniversary falls during our Council Presidency. In December 2020, Ludwig van Beethoven, composer of the European anthem, would have been 250 years old. His 9th Symphony overwhelms me again and again, even after all this time. Every time I listen to it, I discover something new in the music that impresses and moves me – and it’s the same with Europe. Europe can be rediscovered again and again. And it still impresses me.
So permit me to end today with the hope that the message of this music, the spirit of brotherhood and harmony, may guide us in Europe. What could be a more fitting message than that this Europe is capable of great things if we support each other and stand together?
Thank you very much.

Ralph Brinkhaus,
Alexander Dobrindt,
Johann Wadephul,
Dear colleagues,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to mention right away that the United States of America is, and will remain, Europe’s most important partner – this is something I feel strongly about; the U.S. is our natural and indispensable partner. As Europeans, and also as Germans, we share more values and interests with this region than with any other region in the world. We are Allies in NATO, partners in global trade, and like‑minded nations with liberal and democratic constitutional traditions. From Germany’s perspective, we owe the United States a great debt of gratitude, because of the hand of reconciliation that was extended to us after the end of World War II and the end of National Socialism, and because of the support that was lent to us in connection with German unification in 1989 and 1990.
That said, in recent years our partnership was not really as vibrant as it could have been. Yet I do believe – as I did during the somewhat difficult years – that we can only find solutions for common tasks and key future issues through close cooperation as reliable partners.
Now we’re looking to the future. This congress’s motto, “Strengthening the transatlantic bond again – toward a future‑oriented and comprehensive partnership” clearly shows that the CDU/CSU parliamentary group takes the same view. This sets out a task for everyone who is active in politics, not least for the Federal Government, of course. Because despite everything a unified Europe can accomplish, by joining forces with the U.S., we can be far more effective at shaping globalization. We are much stronger if we adopt a common position.
I think we all agree there is no shortage of large challenges to tackle. I need only mention the pandemic, as well as the major task of addressing climate change, and certainly also the global power shift caused by the economic and political clout of China and the in part highly aggressive approach being taken by Russia.
So it is good to know that President Biden – as he has made clear repeatedly since taking office – and his administration advocate a strong transatlantic partnership. Moreover, they believe a rules and values‑based world order forms the foundation for the peaceful, fair and prosperous coexistence of nations. In its first 100 days, the new U.S. administration has already taken seminal decisions in this connection. I would like to give you some examples.
One is the U.S. climate summit that took place two weeks ago. At it, the United States announced ambitious targets – as, of course, has the European Union. I think this sent a very important signal ahead of the 26th COP that will be held in Glasgow this fall. Also, in connection with the United States’ return to the Paris Agreement, we saw a number of countries increase their national targets. In Germany, we are currently in the process – and we discussed this today in the Federal Government – of swiftly implementing the judgment handed down by the Federal Constitutional Court. This means we will redouble our climate action efforts between now and 2030, and that we will raise our reduction target to 65 percent. We will also do everything in our power to achieve climate neutrality as early as 2045. For this, we of course need to adopt and implement additional measures.
Right now, we are also working to face down the pandemic. The United States has rejoined the World Health Organization, and it has contributed its share to the COVAX international vaccine initiative, in the form of financial contributions. When it comes to COVAX, for example, Germany is the largest donor – but the U.S. is also making a considerable contribution. Currently, the U.S. is not exporting any significant quantities of vaccine. However, its domestic vaccination campaign will be concluded in the foreseeable future. I think the U.S. will work very closely with Europe in order to supply the world with vaccines. This will be a multi‑year effort, and it will be a good area for transatlantic cooperation. Maybe we can already send some signals in this regard in Rome on May 21, at the Global Health Summit that is being held in the context of the G20 under the Italian Presidency.
The new administration of President Biden has made a clear commitment to NATO and European security. At our European Council meeting in March, we had a video teleconference with the American president, during which President Biden announced closer cooperation between the United States and Europe. Another important signal is that the U.S. has extended the New START Treaty with Russia. We of course hope this will set the stage for further steps toward disarmament and arms control.
But let me return to European‑American cooperation, including our military and security cooperation: The European Security and Defence Policy is among other things a strong pillar that can supplement our partnership in NATO. In this connection, I want to make perfectly clear that a good transatlantic partnership requires that partners can rely on each other. At the Wales summit, we pledged to work toward spending two percent of our GDP on defense. And Germany remains committed to this target. I would like to recall that the commitment to this two percent target, which actually dates back to the early 2000s, has been renewed in view of Russian aggression in connection with the annexation of Crimea and the situation in eastern Ukraine. So this target has been relatively recently reaffirmed and underscored, and this has a great deal to do with defense, with a view to Russia in particular.
What truly deserves support is that the U.S., together with the European Union, is again showing a commitment with regard to the Iranian nuclear program. Every attempt is being made to encourage Iran to return to compliance with its obligations under this agreement.
Of course, we are also working together – on the understanding that rules and values form the common foundation of our foreign policy – to underscore that human rights need to be upheld wherever that is necessary. That is very important. It applies with a view to Russia, with a view to China, and with regard to many other countries in the world. In this connection, I very much welcome that President Biden wants to host a summit of countries that feel committed to democratic values.
Things are also on the move in the sphere of free and fair trade. We want to try and as swiftly as possible clarify unresolved questions regarding the reform of the World Trade Organization. It is also encouraging to see that talks are now underway in connection with sanctions related to Airbus and Boeing. So more discussions are being held, with a view to solving problems.
Therefore, we could say that the headline on transatlantic cooperation is “We’re Back in Business.” Now that is entirely different from “Business as Usual.” Because, in recent years, a profound change has been happening, one that also has to do with the way that the U.S. views its role in the world. Previously, there was a kind of automatism that the United States would always intervene immediately, especially militarily, wherever crisis situations arose. Going forward, that will not be the case. This is why the U.S. is expecting greater engagement on the part of its partners. So this is now also a task for the European Union – of course, including Germany – when it comes to ensuring our own security, maintaining stability in our neighborhood, and upholding universal values in the world.
I think that we can take up this challenge full of confidence and without hiding our light under a bushel. Germany has proven in various ways that it is a reliable partner. I am thinking, for example, of our engagement in Afghanistan – engagement as part of NATO, whereby Germany has also taken on a lead role in the northern part of the country. Germany will live up to this responsibility in other spheres as well.
A further development that we must keep an eye on is the United States’ pivot to Asia. This, too, is not an entirely new development. President Obama already spoke of an Asian century. We should not make the mistake of thinking this is a pivot away from Europe. Rather, it is a response to changes in the geopolitical distribution of power, especially in the Asia‑Pacific. It is good that the Federal Government has drawn up policy guidelines for this region, as well. This is of course closely connected to China being an ascendant economic and political power in the world. The United States has always been both an Atlantic and a Pacific actor. It is therefore only more than natural for it to react to this rise of China.
In such a situation, we Europeans can of course not be a neutral onlooker, among other things due to our Alliance and our community of shared values. Instead, we remain allies, also in tackling these challenges. Having said that, common values do not automatically result in identical interests. Foreign policy is always a mix of the values one holds and the vested interests one pursues. Carefully formulating what Europe’s interests are is certainly also part of what’s on our plate as transatlantic partners and friends.
As Europeans, we are not interested in the world becoming divided again into two spheres. President Biden recently emphasized he feels the same. However, common rules must be adhered to; and this applies to everyone – to Russia, to China, and to all other countries with which we cooperate.
I believe you can say that, when it comes to values and interests, our relations with China are truly multilayered. On the one hand, we have a keen interest in seeing a large country like China develop well, with people there achieving prosperity and China becoming a part of the multilateral order. We cannot successfully tackle climate change or solve the WTO’s or other global issues without, or against, China. China’s commitments to achieve climate change targets and carbon neutrality by the year 2060, as well as to peak emissions before 2030, are encouraging signs for multilateralism. On the other hand, there is substantial criticism about the human rights situation in China – here, I am thinking of Xinjiang province and the Uighurs, and about the situation in Hong Kong.
In our discussion formats – and we have just recently had our latest round of German‑Chinese intergovernmental consultations – we must talk about the entire range of issues, also the difficult ones. These include human rights topics, along with rule of law topics, and the topic of good economic cooperation and open markets. The EU‑China Comprehensive Agreement on Investment, too, is something that I consider to be a very important project, despite all of the difficulties that will certainly arise in connection with its ratification. Because it will get us greater reciprocity in terms of market access, because we have agreed on compliance with the labor standards of the ILO, and because we have agreed on how trade can be best developed for our mutual benefit.
It will be important for us, also looking to the future, to maintain an exchange in our transatlantic partnership about things that may not immediately result in identical positions. Currently, this includes the issue of Nord Stream 2. What is important for me in this connection is that we pursue a joint policy on Ukraine, and that Ukraine remains an important partner when it comes to the delivery or transit of natural gas.
Of course, we are truly happy – and very much appreciate – that U.S. forces will remain stationed in Germany. We welcome that recent redeployment plans are being dropped – just as we know this creates expectations for us. I have said so earlier.
We should develop the transatlantic partnership as broadly as possible, so that it extends beyond political contacts. There are trade relations, and there are exchange programs for young people. I believe it is very important to nurture people‑to‑people contacts – as we also say in German these days. We could think about providing new incentives in this regard in the near future.
As far as economic cooperation is concerned, I have for some time campaigned for a trade agreement between the United States of America and the European Union. We have trade agreements with many regions of the world. It would make sense if we could develop such a trade agreement with the U.S., like we have done with Canada.
So we have our work cut out for us, as transatlantic partners in a restless world – a world that needs partnerships. That is why I am happy that, with the new U.S. administration, we now have new opportunities that we can seize – and that is what the Federal Government would like to do.
Thank you very much for listening. I wish you all the best for the remaining part of the congress. I see that the next discussion participants are waiting. Warm greetings to everyone in the Reichstag building.
 Secretary-General Guterres, António, Ministers, Excellencies, Members of Parliament from around the world, Distinguished guests, Ladies and gentlemen,
Welcome to Berlin! I and the entire Federal Government are pleased that you have made your way here, bringing your ideas for the future of the internet. Thank you very much for coming!
What the Secretary-General of the United Nations said a few moments ago is quite correct: he was an electrical engineer, and I was a physicist, and then we took a bit of a detour. True. But perhaps it’s no bad thing for technical developments in our age if there are a few politicians who know something about technology – though in my case only the basics remain; doubtless it’s different for António – and who are working together to understand our world.
This is already the 14th Annual Meeting of the United Nations Internet Governance Forum, but this is the first time it has been held here in Germany. Particularly as this year’s host, but also even after this conference week ends, we want to help revitalise and shape the global exchange about values and rules on the internet.
It is, after all, becoming more and more important for all of us to join together to discuss how we want to shape and use the internet of the future. When I say “all of us”, I mean policymakers and civil society, business and the scientific community. “All of us” also means that all countries need to work together. That is the principle underlying multilateralism. That is the principle on which the United Nations builds. And that is also the basis from which we must steer new technological developments.
That is precisely what makes the IGF so valuable. It provides a forum where internet governance actors from all over the world can discuss their experiences and ideas. Basically, this is where the analogue and digital worlds melt into one. “One World. One Net. One Vision.” This year’s slogan sums it up neatly: we want to arrive at a shared understanding of what the internet of the future should look like. What values, principles and rules do we want to take with us from our analogue world to the digital world? What processes and procedures will we need in doing so?
The one value which has particularly accelerated the internet’s triumph is this: freedom. We know that freedom is never something that can be taken for granted; we have to keep on fighting for it and defending it. Together we constantly have to clarify where and how freedom needs to be protected, was freedom means in concrete terms, and also where its boundaries lie – in other words, what is and is not allowed when fundamental rights of others, for instance children, have to be upheld or if fundamental rights of others are violated. That is where the boundaries of freedom lie.
This month in particular, as we saw in the introductory film, we Germans have been reflecting and talking a great deal about just what freedom means for our country. The Berlin Wall fell 30 years ago, in November 1989. The strong desire for freedom felt by the people in the GDR and our neighbours in Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and the three Baltic states could no longer be suppressed by coercive state measures.
Here in Berlin you can see very clearly what the division of Germany and Europe meant for the people. One of the former border crossing points between East and West Berlin is just a few hundred metres away from here. And as you make your way into this venue, you can see a few pieces of the Wall, each of them weighing tonnes. But freedom carried and still carries much more weight.
You may be interested to know that I did my scientific work just a few hundred metres from here, in the eastern part of Berlin. I never saw the Sonnenallee from this side, but my workplace was not far from here.
The Wall and the Iron Curtain were torn down 30 years ago. The people’s striving for freedom and self-determination had prevailed. Our country and also our European continent could finally grow together again. Freedom of travel, freedom of the press, freedom of opinion, freedom to choose an occupation, the right to free development of the personality: all these and other fundamental rights would now apply in Europe again.
Freedom and the hope of progress for all – that was also the vision of the inventor of the internet 50 years ago and of the World Wide Web 30 years ago. And some of the inventors are here with us today. The technology of the internet was developed in such a way that it can transcend territorial borders, can easily be used in all corners of the globe, and can link all human beings. There are now four billion internet users. António Guterres has pointed out how much faster this process evolved than printing and the spread of books did. By 2030, so in just over ten years, the figure is expected to be seven billion.
We are all benefiting from this global connectivity. People from very different countries and cultures are meeting across perceived analogue barriers – barriers created by politics, religion or social status. The truth is that the internet has long since reached every aspect of our daily lives – at least in the case of those who use it. Fewer and fewer people can imagine communicating, working or shopping without using the internet at all. And just as we naturally and unthinkingly use the internet round the clock, so we naturally and unthinkingly regard it as a global network in which geographical distance is now largely irrelevant. Flows of data and information connect cities, countries and continents.
It is interesting that geographical distances, for instance that need to be covered with a network of underwater cables, do in fact still play a role when it comes to the actual technology. Many of the data links between North and South America go via the cable landing point in Fortaleza, Brazil. The data flow between Europe and Asia goes via underwater cables in the Suez Canal. A whole cluster of cables linking the Asia-Pacific region make landfall in Singapore. Another example is internet exchange points, where internet providers link up with the global network, making internet access possible. Three of the biggest internet exchanges are in Europe – in Frankfurt, Amsterdam and London. They will keep us connected even after the United Kingdom has left the European Union.
This shared internet infrastructure has become a cornerstone of the global economy. It is of vital importance for sustainable development and innovation worldwide. Billions of people can make their views and ideas known on the internet. They can communicate, exchange information and compare experiences. The internet is home to democratic debate and political opinion-forming – for good and not so good, because, as the Secretary-General also pointed out, there are some people who stay in their own bubble and no longer engage at all with anyone who takes a different view. This is one of the challenges the internet presents us with.
But there are other reasons, too, why a free and open internet and the internet’s many decentralised structures are a thorn in the side of some people. Non‑democratic states and their governments are interfering with the freedoms the internet creates. They are trying to push through their own or national interests and, to this end, to seal their nets off from the global internet. Even some private companies are investing in their own, closed-off infrastructures. This raises the danger that global companies might build up parallel worlds – with their own rules and standards – which they will then try to impose on others via international bodies.
This is a very difficult topic. I understand that this forum wants to confront precisely this issue. Because, if I can put it this way, we have to clarify what we mean when, on the one hand, we want to retain our digital sovereignty but, on the other, we want to act multilaterally, and not shut ourselves off. Of course digital sovereignty is very important. But it may be that we all have come to understand something different by that, even though we are using the same term. As I understand it, digital sovereignty does not mean protectionism, or that state authorities say what information can be disseminated – censorship, in other words; rather, it describes the ability both of individuals and of society to shape the digital transformation in a self-determined way.
So, in the digital world as elsewhere, technological innovation has to be in the service of humanity, not the other way around. Having found success with the social market economy system, we in Germany know that technological innovations do not just happen, that companies do not simply evolve automatically, but that they always need parameters and guidelines. That was the case in the industrial revolution, and it will need to be the same in the internet age.
In other words, we need sovereignty over what happens. And so, if we are convinced that isolationism is not an expression of sovereignty, but that we have to base our actions on a shared understanding and shared values, then precisely that – a commitment to a shared, free, open and secure global internet – is in fact an expression of sovereignty.
Because what would the consequences be if we went down the road of isolationism? To my mind, the consequences of an increasingly fragmented internet can never be good. They can be many and varied, but never good. The global infrastructure could become unstable and vulnerable to attack. There would be more surveillance. The state would increasingly filter and censor information. Perhaps the internet and mobile phone networks would even be shut down in order to prevent the people from communicating.
This means that an attack on internet connectivity, the foundation for a free and open internet, has become a dangerous political instrument. Many people have first-hand experience of what that’s like. Attacks like this can deprive the people of their fundamental rights to information and communication. This turns the idea underlying the internet, the idea of its inventors, completely on its head. And so we should all be determined to protect the heart of the internet as a global public good. We can only do that if we think again about the governance structures of this global network that links us all.
But how can we counter the efforts of individual states to split off from the free internet or shape it on their own? I believe we can do so by realising that just as the strength of networks is measured by the number of their users, so we need the efforts of many to preserve a cross-border, decentralised internet. In other words: by realising that we have to act multilaterally. Only in this way can we develop a shared, cross-border understanding and appreciation of the value of a free internet. And so I warmly welcome the UN Secretary-General’s announcement that he will be appointing an envoy for these talks, who will have his full confidence.
During Germany’s G20 Presidency in 2017 we established a “digital strand” in the G20. Of course we are aware that the G20 states do not represent the entire world. But it would already be a big step forward if agreement on this important issue could be reached within that group. For this reason, I am pleased that we have got important commitments from the G20 states, including on global connectivity and on international standards. How did we manage to do this? Mainly because we also involved civil society and the business community. Governments alone cannot succeed. That is why I find it so important that civil society and business are always involved in the G20 process – especially, as António Guterres pointed out, women, who risk being left behind in the new value chains created by the internet.
So, the internet cannot and must not be shaped by states and governments alone. Because the fundamental issues surrounding the internet ultimately affect each and every one of us. That’s why we need a comprehensive dialogue and a multi-stakeholder approach, as we say these days – in other words, exactly the approach taken by the IGF. And so I am very grateful that you have gathered here in Berlin to present your view of matters. Of course this is a new approach. The traditional multilateral structures only know cooperation between governments. But I don’t believe that alone is enough nowadays. That is why we have to keep on pushing this broad-based approach.
If we can use the internet globally or if we want to use the internet globally, then we also have to think globally. The internet affects everyone, even people with no access to it. And so we have to improve internet access and equal participation in the digital transformation. The question of inclusion is one of the topics you will be discussing intensively over the next few days. I was very happy to learn, at a Federal Government closed meeting a few days ago, that there are plans to create a comprehensive digital market in Africa, that there is a digital commissioner, and that within the African Union the intention is not only to engage in free trade in the traditional sense but also to focus on digital development, one element being inclusive internet access.
António Guterres, you have worked with international experts from the fields of policymaking, business, academia and civil society to produce a report on digital cooperation. Thanks to your proposals for new approaches to shaping the common digital future, an important debate is gathering pace. In talking about internet governance, we must first agree on values. We must agree on how to protect human rights, democracy and the rule of law in the digital age, and on how to strengthen equal participation and security on the net, as well as confidence in the net.
Of course we will have to blaze new trails. Normally, you see, we are used to translating everything we agree in international treaties or agreements into national legislation. This time, however, more is needed. The business community needs to be involved, and so do the people – and of course this cannot be ensured through laws alone. The challenge is considerable. The digital transformation poses fundamental questions for our societies. By no means everything that is feasible online or technically possible is ethically desirable. That is something, by the way, that we know even from the pre-digital world. These are questions we will have to discuss in depth, particularly with an eye to artificial intelligence.
We will have to talk not only about what we want, but also about what we don’t want. For example, if I may: there are some in the community who would rather talk about what is possible than about what we do not want to do with the new technical possibilities. Even though it is not about interfering with the internet, but about the principle that technology is there to serve the people.
All this can only work if everyone works together: governments, international organisations and formats, and civil society, must be equally involved in discussions. If we are honest, and looking just at my own country, then it has to be said that we have not yet reached consensus among all sides. We saw this in the debate on copyright in the European Union, for instance, and also in connection with the General Data Protection Regulation. So there are a great number of things still the subject of much heated debate.
That is why we must be prepared to organise new opportunities for participation in which every voice is heard and every voice is equal. In other words, we need real cooperation. We also need discourse skills. Entrenching ourselves in internet bubbles where our own viewpoint holds sway is definitely not the way to solve the problems.
It is in this spirit that the Internet Governance Forum here in Berlin is breaking new ground. I regard it as an important signal that parliamentarians from all over the world have travelled to Berlin in response to an initiative by Federal Economic Affairs Minister Peter Altmaier. In democratic terms, too, this is a huge boon.
Moreover, we, the German Government, never regard the digital transformation as something to be dealt with at national level; rather, we always also think on a European level. Because Europe’s ideas can make a major contribution to the shared global vision of the future of the internet.
Overall, though, reshaping internet governance is of course a matter that will require global efforts. It will require states and stakeholders to stand shoulder to shoulder. Germany is ready to help shape a new global internet policy under the auspices of the United Nations. We are convinced that the United Nations and the IGF have a key role to play in bringing about a global consensus in favour of an open, free and decentralised internet.
On that note, ladies and gentlemen, I wish you every success here at the Internet Governance Forum in Berlin. Take a little bit of inspiration from this place where 30 years ago the fall of the Wall ushered in a new age. We in the former GDR never thought we would see the Wall fall in our lifetime. But it did happen – thanks to many courageous people and some favourable circumstances. So one never knows whether the courage of an individual or of many individuals might not suddenly open up paths which at present appear virtually inaccessible. So please speak freely and frankly in the workshops, panel discussions and meetings.
I wish you a week of interesting encounters with people whom you perhaps otherwise only know from the internet. Communication doesn’t always have to be digital; you can go for a beer or a glass of wine in one of Berlin’s great pubs and restaurants. Enjoy Berlin. Thank you very much. All the best.
 
Thank you very much, Professor Schwab,
Ladies and gentlemen on the screens,
COVID-19 has changed the world – as we can see from this year’s Davos event. For now, we are meeting online. A physical event will then be held in May, but in Singapore rather than Davos. As I just said to Prof. Schwab before this meeting, I hope that you will not be permanently replacing the beautiful mountains of Davos with the skyscrapers of Singapore, although Singapore is of course a wonderful, vibrant and dynamic place.
This time one year ago, it was not yet clear to all of us that we would be living through a pandemic. But some people already knew or suspected as much, and among them was Mr Şahin, the CEO of BioNTech, who told me that he decided on 24 January to upend his company’s entire research programme and develop an mRNA vaccine against this virus. He and many other people around the world have helped ensure that, twelve months later, we have at our disposal limited quantities, certainly, but highly promising vaccines. This shows what humanity is capable of, what science and research are capable of – because it means, in my view, that we have found a route out of the pandemic, albeit a longer and harder route than many of us had hoped. BioNTech has, then – together with Pfizer, and in parallel to other companies around the world – developed a vaccine. It is a start-up from Germany where people from 60 nations work and research together. This also goes to show how valuable international cooperation is and what it can achieve.
However, the pandemic has had a deep impact on our economy and our society, one which will certainly continue to shape our lives in the coming months and years. One hundred million people worldwide have already been infected with the virus. More than two million have died. There are doubtless many more cases which have gone unreported. We are seeing economic downturns in many areas.
The Davos Forum is the right place to discuss the time after the pandemic and ways out of the crisis. Our guiding principle must of course be that everything which helps to curb the pandemic is good. Not just good for people’s health, but also good for economic development and for social and cultural opportunities.
You have chosen the motto The Great Reset as this year’s theme. I would like to ask: Do we really need a great reset, or is what we need in fact a new beginning – less in terms of our objectives and more in terms of how resolutely we act? I would therefore like to address three issues related to the question of what the pandemic has shown us.
Firstly, I believe it has shown us how globally connected we are. If we look at how the virus spread from Wuhan in China around the world, what we actually witnessed was one form of globalisation – not through human action but through the spread of this virus. We have seen that, in a situation where the stakes are so high, trying to cut oneself off from the world long-term cannot succeed; at least, it has not done so in the fight against this virus.
Secondly, it has shown how vulnerable we are. The virus was somehow transmitted from animals to humans. This brings home once again the fact that our lives are deeply entwined with our natural environment. Despite all the technology at our command and everything we are capable of, it is clear that we are and will remain dependent on nature. There is something very reassuring about this, but at the same time, of course, it has consequences.
Thirdly, I would like to make it very clear, and I am referring to Germany here, that this pandemic is a once-in-a-century natural event or indeed disaster which lays bare the resilience, or the lack of resilience, of our societies – as Prof. Schwab just mentioned himself. In other words, weaknesses in our societies have been exposed. Strengths have also been revealed. But we naturally want to do everything we can to eliminate these weaknesses.
Perhaps I should begin with what Germany has learnt – about our weaknesses and our strengths. I can say that we were able to build considerably on the foundation of civic-mindedness, on the commitment and solidarity of the public as a whole. This is our most precious asset. Despite all of the difficulties that a federal structure entails, it also has significant strengths, because it means that responsible action can be taken across the country. But it is also true that all of us, including in Germany, although we are deeply embedded in Europe, made mistakes in the beginning and reflexively withdrew to focus on ourselves alone, only to learn as time went by how we can respond better by acting together.
What have we observed in Germany? The speed with which we were able to act leaves a lot to be desired. Many of our processes are highly bureaucratic and take too long. This is something that we must work on.
But we were able to build on a strong foundation in Germany, namely on solid finances. This enabled us to take resolute action, to help our businesses, to help our people, to use instruments such as short-time work, to keep the economy going and to launch an unprecedented stimulus package worth over 100 billion euro, which has of course also helped bring stability to life in our society as a whole.
We made a poor impression – and this is still the case today – when it comes to the digitalisation of our society. This starts with interregional communication between health offices. It concerns the digitalisation of our administration. It also concerns the digitalisation of our education system, for example when it comes to remote teaching and distance learning at school and university level. This is one focus of our stimulus programme, because we know that we must become better and faster in this area. We know that we need to make up for lost time.
We have also seen how crucial a resilient healthcare system is. In Germany, it became clear that we have a very strong individual healthcare system but that, when it comes to community health, to solidarity and prevention, we do not yet have the necessary resilience. In this respect, we must therefore learn from the crisis, from the pandemic.
We believe that our research policy has been vindicated. During my time as Federal Chancellor, we have steadily increased spending on research and development. These now contribute over three percent of our GDP and we want to push that to 3.5 percent. Everything that we are currently seeing with regard to the development of vaccines, as well as other technologies, shows that focusing on research and development is absolutely the right choice.
We must now discuss a major issue that is facing the world. The word sovereignty is once again on everyone’s lips. During the pandemic, supply chains have not always proved their resilience; some have simply collapsed. In order to learn from the pandemic, we must ask if it creates weak points when we depend too heavily on global supply chains, or how we can make these supply chains so stable and reliable that they will hold up even under significant strain. Lapsing into regional protectionism must, I believe, be prevented, if we truly aim to bring the world back on track for growth. But this question must be discussed honestly and openly. And supply chains must be better protected if we truly want to rely on them even in challenging circumstances.
That brings me to the issue of vulnerability. Vulnerability is precisely what we saw as supply chains collapsed. But I would primarily like to discuss vulnerability in terms of the fact that a virus has been transmitted from animals to humans, which I believe goes to show that all of our major global conventions on sustainability – from the Convention on Biological Diversity to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, which is now reflected in the Paris Agreement – are absolutely right and that we must work harder to implement them than we have done to date, more resolutely and uncompromisingly.
We can deliver on this before the year is out, with the Biodiversity Conference in Kunming in China and also, crucially, by implementing the Paris Agreement. The European Union has done what is expected. As a first step, we have raised our European goal for CO2 reductions by the year 2030 from 40 percent to 55 percent. We have committed to becoming climate-neutral by 2050. If we succeed in this, Europe may become the very first climate-neutral continent. Ahead of us lie – as I believe the President of the Commission has mentioned – deeply challenging months in which we must formulate the Green Deal, setting out the ways in which we can achieve this reduction of 55 percent.
Germany now draws more than 40 percent of its energy from renewable sources. But we know how much effort is required to achieve this. If we truly hope to overcome the vulnerability caused by climate change, we must take drastic political action – with the support and input of the public rather than imposing measures on them. For us, that means phasing out fossil fuels, transitioning to hydrogen, including for process energy, and transforming mobility to run on electricity or indeed hydrogen; we must of course remain open to all technological possibilities.
In its efforts to create a recovery plan – quite an extraordinary step – in response to this extraordinary crisis, the European Union has decided that we should not simply carry on with the same stimulus programmes as always, but instead set very clear priorities. This means that more than 35 percent of the funding must be used for climate change mitigation and more than 20 percent for digitalisation. This is a genuine investment in our future, in greater sustainability.
If the world has achieved anything in recent years which offers the key to overcoming our vulnerability, then it is the Sustainable Development Goals for 2030, which make it clear exactly what we must do to avoid remaining as vulnerable as we are today. However, the United Nations summit last year showed that we are still far from meeting expectations in this regard. The great danger after the pandemic is that we – by which I mean industrialised countries – might initially focus primarily on ourselves and neglect development efforts. We cannot allow that to happen. And so it is Germany’s political goal – and also our goal at European level – not to cut spending on development cooperation, but rather to increase it.
The third point is the issue of global interconnectedness, the dependencies that underpin our lives. This is of course something which we have frequently addressed in recent years. And it is now even clearer to me – it was already quite clear – that we must take a multilateral approach and that isolationism will not help us to tackle our problems.
This is first and foremost clear when we look at the pivotal issue of vaccination, which is of course a route out of the pandemic. And in this regard we should see to it that our words are followed by deeds. I am very grateful that we have decided on a multilateral approach to vaccination and that COVAX was founded as a result. The G20 under Saudi Arabia’s Presidency, among others, did a great deal to make this happen. One aspect of COVAX is that richer countries must pay in – quite rightly. Germany is taking part, the European Union is taking part, and we will continue our involvement going forward. Money is one aspect of this. The other aspect, at a time of scarcity, is of course the availability of vaccines. In other words, it is a question of distribution and not just of money. And so I am delighted that Gavi, which has headed negotiations on behalf of COVAX, has already concluded the first contracts – and with companies which have received approval from bodies including the European Medicines Agency. I am delighted that the World Bank is providing such extensive support for these measures. We will of course do everything we can to ensure that distribution can advance quickly. But we should be under no illusion. The question of who in the world receives which vaccine when will of course create new bonds and new memories, because anyone who receives help in such an emergency will of course remember this all the more clearly than they would in ordinary times or times of plenty.
I believe it is clear that this is the moment for multilateralism. What is multilateralism? Multilateralism does not, of course, just mean that we work together somehow or other, but that we do so transparently. It must in all honesty be said that at the beginning of the pandemic, there was perhaps not enough transparency with regard to the information on the outbreak of the pandemic in China and also to the sharing of this information by the World Health Organization. But this does not mean that we will now look back to dwell on the failures that were made; instead, we must learn from them. And so I am pleased that a WHO delegation is now in China and will be able to take another look at the situation.
We must strengthen the WHO, the World Health Organization. It is thus very encouraging that the United States of America, now that Joe Biden has taken office, has rejoined the WHO and will contribute to its efforts. This sends an important and powerful message.
As I have said, global connectedness means that we must take an interest in the development of every part of the world. This means that development cooperation also serves our own national interests – this is our belief in Germany, as elsewhere. We will in particular continue to strengthen our bond with Africa and our investments there. During our G20 Presidency, we launched the Compact with Africa, which still enjoys support from the IWF and the World Bank today. We will continue our involvement with this initiative.
Another important consideration is fair global trade, an issue with many different aspects. The WTO supports rules-based international trade structures, and we must work to reinforce these structures. Efforts to do so have come to a standstill in recent years and this must be remedied. Because no rulings can be issued at the moment, the WTO is essentially unable to take proper action. Notwithstanding my great respect and appreciation for bilateral international trade agreements, I believe that the WTO is the core element of rules-based global trade. And so Germany will continue its efforts to strengthen this organisation even after the pandemic.
However, we do also have a wide range of bilateral and multilateral trade agreements. I would like to mention the impressive RCEP agreement, which creates close trade links between countries with very different social structures within the Asia-Pacific region.
During Germany’s Presidency of the Council of the EU, we took a step forwards in consolidating the EU-China investment agreement, which had been the subject of lengthy negotiations beginning in 2013, and reaching a political agreement. Why am I so delighted that we were able to take this step? Because I believe that we can ensure a new quality in Europe’s investments in China as well as China’s in Europe, which will in turn mean that we do greater justice to the need for reciprocity, which will create greater transparency around subsidies in particular for state-owned companies, which will also enable more predictable access to high-tech areas and – this is particularly important to me – which also affects labour standards, in particular the standards of the International Labour Organization. If we want to have sustainable multilateral institutions in the area of trade in particular, issues of environmental protection, climate change mitigation and fair labour will play an increasingly important role. This is why the core standards of the International Labour Organization are so important. This is something else that we have been able to establish more firmly thanks to our efforts.
We must rapidly find multilateral solutions to the new challenges of digitalisation. I hope that we will be able to continue and expand the OECD’s work on a minimum tax for digital companies together with the new US administration in particular, and that we will be more successful in enshrining the central role of competition law around the world in order to prevent monopolies from emerging. There are of course trends in this direction. We must address this at an international level, too, because otherwise each one of us will be left to tackle monopolistic structures alone and our efforts will be insufficient.
We have a keen interest in seeing economic recovery begin around the world. We have seen the latest figures. There are regions where the economy is growing. Europe, on the other hand, has been relatively hard hit, but growth is forecast for this year. However, the recovery must as far as possible be a global recovery, which naturally means that we must coordinate our efforts. I believe that the G20 has a key role to play here. The Italian Presidency is, of course, also working in precisely this direction.
When we look at what the pandemic has done to us, I would conclude that it has served to confirm everything that made up the spirit of Davos in recent years. The issues discussed there were the right ones. There is a quote by the German writer Erich Kästner: “There is no good unless one does it.” The pandemic has shown us that discussion, debate and clarity of thought are important. But I believe it has also shown us that the time is now coming when we must act, making the greatest possible shared and concerted effort in line with the same, mutually agreed principles; when, in short, we must do something to remedy as far as possible the weaknesses that we have seen exposed.
That is all – thank you for listening.
Professor Schwab, Colleagues, Ladies and gentlemen,
I am pleased to be back in Davos – in a very special situation this year, but I will get back to that later.
Today, when Europe is very much the focus of the discussions at this Davos Forum, I would like to recall that the First World War ended 100 years ago, in 1918. It is described as the seminal catastrophe of the 20th century. Worse catastrophes followed it. Like sleepwalkers, the politicians of the time blundered into a terrible situation. Today, 100 years later, when there are fewer and fewer surviving eyewitnesses to the Second World War, we need to ask ourselves if we have really learned from history or not. I think the generations of people born after the Second World War will need to prove whether they have really learned something.
The lessons of the Second World War led to the foundation of the United Nations. This was a multilateral response, a response founded on cooperation. Over 25 years ago, we experienced the end of the Cold War and of the division of the world into two blocs. This meant that for the first time, multilateralism and cooperation had an opportunity to thrive.
There was a multilateral response aimed at resolving the great challenge of 2007 and 2008, the international financial crisis. This response took the form of meetings between the Heads of State and Government of the G20, whose Presidency is held by Argentina this year. Germany held the Presidency last year and the motto of our Presidency was “shaping an interconnected world”. We tried to foster global cooperation in what is not a particularly easy time. We made progress in global cooperation in the health sector, the partnership with Africa and the global steel forum, which addresses dumping and fair trade. We tried to strengthen the role of multilateral organisations and sought to promote an open global trade system. As regards the great challenge to humankind, climate change, we had to draw our conclusions without the United States of America, unfortunately. Nevertheless, climate change remains a huge threat.
We see that national egoism exists. We see that populism exists. We see that a polarising atmosphere prevails in many countries. Perhaps there is also widespread concern about whether multilateral cooperation is really capable of solving people’s problems honestly and fairly and whether everyone can be included given the great technological challenges of the Digital Revolution and disruptive changes. There are doubts about this everywhere. And that, Professor Schwab, is why I think “creating a shared future in a fractured world” is exactly the right motto for 2018.
To be honest, the country I come from and where I am Federal Chancellor also has difficulties. We are experiencing a level of polarisation not seen for decades. Germany is challenged by two events, which are also a result of globalisation – the euro crisis, which we have now largely overcome, and the migration of recent years. But let me tell you that Germany – as repeatedly shown in my earlier and current talks on forming a government – wants to be a country that continues to play its part in the future in order to solve tomorrow’s problems by working together in the world. We believe that isolation is not constructive. We believe that we need to cooperate and that protectionism is not the right answer. And we believe that if we think things are not being run fairly and mechanisms are not reciprocal, then we should seek multilateral solutions, and not unilateral responses, which ultimately only serve to further isolation and protectionism.
That is why it is so important that Germany forms a government quickly. I hope we will achieve this. Two key ideas are important in the talks we are currently conducting. The first is how we can safeguard prosperity for our country and its people. At the moment, we have a situation in Germany in which we can say that we are doing well – we are doing very well. All signs indicate that in 2020 we will have enjoyed eleven consecutive years of growth. The last time we experienced that was in the 1950s. More people than ever before are in employment. We have a solid financial situation. We have made good progress as regards adopting digital technology in our business sector and with Industrie 4.0. However – and I want to state this very frankly – we are not leaders in other areas of digital technology such as society and the state.
For the next four years, our job will therefore be to bring digital technology to our education system and bureaucracy, to give the public the option of communicating with their state via digital technology in the digital age and to create a better ecosystem for start-ups so that we remain a good place for innovation. I take this challenge very seriously indeed. We have no time to lose, as we know that other parts of the world are developing very rapidly in this regard. We also see that countries such as Estonia, which just held the Presidency of the Council of the European Union, are far more developed than a country like Germany, which is not at the top of the European league as regards digitisation.
We know that the spread of digital technology means we need to deal with lifelong learning and find completely new solutions for our social systems. That means the lesson is, and must be, that disruptive technological changes alter our societies. In an ageing country like Germany, the willingness to respond to this and to adopt new technology is, to put it mildly, not exactly widespread. This means that the question of what resources we can allocate and how to invest in the future are major topics in our talks.
We know that if we want to keep our promise of prosperity for all in the digital age, including for everyone in Germany, we need a smart social market economy and not merely smart industry. This means we also need to deal with the question of how we can include everyone. I think this is one of the most urgent questions because countries that are divided are far less able to take multilateral action and to cooperate with others. Instead, there is a very great danger that they will withdraw.
None of these questions can be solved at national level. That is why the question of what happens next in Germany is inextricably linked with the question of what happens next in Europe. With a view to large countries such as China and India, many problems can only be solved through cooperation at European level in the European Union. Interestingly, regrettable as the decision by the people of the United Kingdom to leave the EU was, the more it has given us the courage to concentrate on the big picture. I would like to say expressly that the election of French President Emmanuel Macron has brought new impetus to the European Union – and that will make us stronger.
What do we need to do? At a time when not all EU Member States say that an ever closer union is just what they have in mind, we need to learn to find answers to the major questions in Europe and to allow issues that can be solved locally to be solved by local people. Otherwise, there will not be a good atmosphere in Europe. Our priority must be to foster our economic strength. That means that after having overcome the euro crisis relatively well, with all Member States in the euro area now experiencing growth and higher employment once again, we need to look towards the future. In my opinion, that is mainly why we need to expand the digital single market. In this regard, I believe there are two reasons why we are under pressure in the European Union.
Firstly, large US companies have access to data – and data is the raw material of the 21st century. The answer to the question of who owns this data will ultimately decide whether democracy, participation, sovereignty in the digital age and economic success can go together. On the other hand, there are countries, such as China, where you have very close cooperation between the state authorities and those who gather data, where they are virtually one and the same thing. Europeans have not yet made a real decision on how they want to deal with data. There is a great danger that we are too slow and will find ourselves overturned by events, so to speak, while we hold our philosophical debates about data sovereignty. That means we need to take action. I believe that our European social market economy gives us a chance to foster a fair digital age in which the privatisation of all personal data is not simply accepted as the normal state of affairs, but it is accepted that, in order to make the best of this era for the public, data is the raw material of the 21st century.
Secondly, we need to make our euro area stronger. That means we need a capital market union – the capital market is still fragmented. We need to complete the banking union. We need to think about how we can defend ourselves against future crises that hit us from outside so that risk is not simply communitarised and we all become liable, although everyone actually needs to manage their own risks. At the same time, we need to ensure that we are an interesting location for investment. That is why we cannot afford to isolate ourselves. Instead, we need to keep up with the world’s best and promote our multilateral approach.
If we want to be taken seriously as Europeans, we face another great task, namely to work together in the field of foreign policy. Common European foreign policy remains underdeveloped. If Europe, with its future 27 Member States, is not in a position to send a coherent message to large countries such as China, India, the United States or Russia in the future, but instead conducts foreign policy at national level while trying to be a global player, this will result in failure. We still have plenty of work ahead of us in this regard because we are not yet able to feel certain that we can truly rely on each other.
At the same time, there has been great progress in one area, and I am pleased that Germany’s Defence Minister is here with us. Following years of discussion in Europe, we have succeeded in establishing European defence cooperation in light of the challenges we see. That is very important for two reasons. Firstly, this cooperation does not seek to undermine NATO. We are very glad that the NATO Secretary General was involved in the foundation of our common defence policy and explicitly said that he sees it as complementary. Secondly, we are in a position to take a united stance towards third countries, something that is very important to us. This means we now have a common policy on security, development cooperation and economic development issues. We can show that we have a coherent model, particularly as regards Africa. This is very important.
Why are common foreign policy, common defence policy and common development policy of such great interest? If you look at the regions around Europe, you will see that most global conflicts are taking place on our doorstep. We experienced this in 2015 when one might say globalisation arrived in Europe in the form of people, refugees, when we did not in fact deal with the civil war in Syria or with IS in Iraq. I am sure that my Italian counterpart just reported here on the challenges regarding migration from Africa. We basically have the Sunni-Shi’ite conflicts on our doorstep. We have IS on our doorstep. Our neighbour is Africa, just a few kilometres from the southern part of Europe. Syria is a neighbour of Cyprus.
The fact that Europe was not the most active continent as regards foreign policy, but instead often relied on the United States of America, which is now focusing more on itself, must therefore lead us to say that we need to take on more responsibility and to take our fate into our own hands to a greater extent. We are doing so by establishing a common defence policy and working together to tackle the challenge of migration, although there is still a great lack of unity on this topic within the European Union.
We now agree that we need to protect our external borders. But what does that mean? Europe is an interesting continent or entity. We created a common currency, but we never thought about what would happen if it were to be hit by crisis. Now we are making up for lost time and basically building the foundation that we should have created from the outset. We were incredibly proud to have freedom of movement. When you travel around the Schengen area, you do not need to show your passport anywhere. But we did not think about how to protect our external borders and whether we know who enters or leaves Europe. In hindsight, we have to ask ourselves how we could have done something like that without thinking about these issues. But we simply felt too safe.
Now we are working on an entry and exit system. We have set up a common border protection agency. However, one thing is true – since the Roman Empire and the construction of the Great Wall of China, history has taught us that isolation alone does not help to protect borders. Instead, what we need are good relations with our neighbours, agreements and international treaties in order to know how we can cope with the challenge of illegal migration. That is exactly what we have learned. This is shown in the EU’s agreement with Turkey and our migration partnerships with Africa. But naturally, we still have a great deal to do.
If you think about it, you will realise that we share responsibility. If wealth inequality becomes ever greater, we will not be able to sign treaties with one another in an open world. We share responsibility for Africa’s development. We share responsibility for what happens next in Iraq. We share responsibility for what happens next in Libya. We are hesitant to get involved, but we have in fact been successful in many areas in recent years. However, there is still a huge amount of work ahead of us. There is great consensus in the European Union on this – far more consensus, in fact, than on the question of how we allocate the refugees who arrive in Europe among the various Member States. Unfortunately, there is still no agreement on that. However, we are in a better position as regards the other issues.
Naturally, we also have the challenge of working with Africa. We will only have the strength to do so if our own economy is strong. It is of great importance to me personally that we work with Africa, firstly because we Europeans owe a great debt to the continent of Africa from the time of colonisation and secondly because we have a profound interest in positive development in Africa. We say “Africa”, but it actually has over 50 different countries with very different levels of development. What is now important is that we work with Africa on ensuring it shares in greater wealth. That is why we named our initiative “Compact with Africa” and not “Compact for Africa”. It is not a paternalistic partnership, but rather a partnership among equals. This means investing in education so that economic growth is not lower than population growth. Above all, it means using a completely new model of development aid, one based on wide-ranging development, including economic development. We will continue working in this way.
With regard to Europe, we have a problem that I would now like to address. Naturally, we all very much regret that the United Kingdom will no longer be part of the European Union. Our colleague Theresa May will be here tomorrow. On behalf of Germany, but also other countries, I would like to say that we want to continue having a good partnership with the United Kingdom in the future. However, we will also make clear that access to the single market is tied to Europe’s four freedoms. We can make no compromises on that. But we know that we are closely linked to the United Kingdom through values, convictions and foreign policy interests. It is up to the United Kingdom to say how close it wants this partnership to be. We are open to all forms of partnerships.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have tried to make clear to you what I believe can be done in a “fractured world”. I think this always begins at home. The more we succeed in overcoming divisions in our own countries, the more freedom we will have to focus on solidarity, cooperation and multilateralism. Fundamentally, the solutions are always similar – we can leave no one behind. Perhaps one of the greatest tasks facing us in an age of hugely disruptive challenges arising from the spread of digital technology is to prevent division.
Professor Schwab, we spoke earlier about this and I am delighted that you are supporting networks to foster discussion between policymakers and business people on what is an ethical way to manage disruptive developments. If we do not succeed in finding an answer, the same thing will happen as in the early days of capitalism – we will be confronted with something like Luddites, as was the case back then. The task now – and in conclusion, I call on the business people here, who live in an investment environment with conditions from another era that they did not create themselves – is to please work with us on transferring these conditions to a new era.
We are wrong to think it is enough for 20 or 30 percent of a country’s population to be enthusiastic about disruptive changes to ensure the entire country is on board. It is not enough. It requires lifelong learning and many other things. I believe many people will be happy to go along with this. But many others will need to be invited to do so because they are not able to keep up at once with this crazy tempo.
My hope is that this Davos forum will offer space for these questions because it brings together many people from the spheres of business, politics and society. Then we can achieve this and prevent the mistakes of the 20th century being repeated in any way. We know that the ways of causing great harm using disruptive digital developments and of confounding societies are of a very different nature to what we experienced in the 20th century. However, they are at least as harmful. That is why we need to achieve a genuine social market economy in this area, as we would say in Germany. Then global cooperation will also work. Germany would like to continue working on this in the future. If you could kindly keep your fingers crossed for me that we manage to form a government, this will work even better.
Thank you very much.

Mr. Gurría, Ángel, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen,
 I promised Ángel Gurría a long time ago that I would visit the OECD. Today, I am fulfilling that promise.
 The OECD has been an important player in international economic policy for over 50 years. I think that we, Germany, have also done our part in helping the OECD, alongside other international organisations, to play an important role in the new formats for cooperation in the world. In recent years the OECD has successfully managed to shake off its image as an elite organisation for developed, industrialised countries simply through its involvement in G20 meetings and through the fact that new Member States have joined the Organisation. There are now 34 Member States. Accession negotiations are under way with Russia, and the OECD has begun an accession process with Colombia. Your own country, Mexico, as an emerging economy, has been a member for 20 years.
 The OECD has acquired a high reputation as an uncompromising but important advisor when it comes to drawing comparisons, compiling statistics and issuing recommendations. Criticism from the OECD is perceived as being relatively harsh in Germany. For example, the initial results of the PISA studies were not exactly flattering for us. But having to acknowledge that we were not as good as we thought we were in a field that comprises the core of our self-esteem, in education, really inspired change in Germany. Over the years, we have been able to see a steady improvement in our performance in the PISA studies. They have therefore become a truly important tool for us.
 The issues here are structural reforms and coherent global economic growth. That is why the global organisations played such an important role as advisors during the crises of recent years and continue to do so today. From the standpoint of an EU Member State we have basically weathered two major crises since 2007: first the international financial crisis, followed by the euro or sovereign debt crisis, from which we have not yet fully emerged.
 With the Heiligendamm Process we sought to find a way out of a situation in which the G8 could no longer be the only format. At the time we spent endless hours discussing whether it should be G13 or G15. Then suddenly the financial crisis hit, and soon after we had the G20. Since then, everything has gone quiet on the subject. For in my opinion it has become a very interesting format which, in cooperation with regional economic organisations, provides us with a broad picture of the global economic system.
 I would still like to think that the lesson we have learned from the financial crisis could inspire us to formulate a charter for sustainable growth – and I would like to thank the OECD for its support for this idea. It would doubtless have to be constructed piecemeal, chapter by chapter. But one example which shows that we are really making practical progress – I find it a very good thing and can only encourage Australia, too, to discuss it further – is the issue of corporate taxation. The question of fairness is at stake. Many people wonder how it is possible for companies not to pay any taxes in the countries where they create their value. The subject of base erosion and profit shifting is now being addressed. The OECD’s role in defining standards in this area should not be underestimated. The next step, I believe, must be to implement such standards really quickly, not only within the context of the G20 but maybe also in countries like Switzerland – I was talking to the President of the Swiss Confederation about this only yesterday – so that we can increase the transfer of information and make the tax system fairer.
 In highly industrialised countries we, too, are concerned with the question of what globalisation means for us. Globalisation makes some people fearful. However, I believe that if we can embrace it with openness and curiosity, mindful of the world’s diversity, we can shape globalisation in a positive way. Yet we still have a lot to learn in this area. What the experience of our German economic system, the social market economy, has taught us is that markets need to operate according to certain rules. In the context of globalisation, effective rules can only be agreed on an international scale. That doesn’t mean applying the same yardstick everywhere, but steps must be taken to prevent the formation of oligopolies which shape the economy in such a way that it rules the people. I think it goes without saying that people all over the world believe that the economy should serve the people. That is the core issue which concerns us greatly when it comes to regulating financial markets. With the G20 we have introduced a process which drives many of these regulations forward. In this area, too, the OECD needs to exert further pressure.
 Ladies and gentlemen, we Europeans have a contribution to make if we want to continue to enjoy prosperity in future. The question of competitiveness plays a central role here. Everything that the OECD urges us to observe, whether these recommendations are country-specific or apply to the eurozone as a whole, not only shows us where our strengths lie but also identifies our weaknesses. We in the European Union make up seven percent of the world’s population. That is certainly not very much, and the trend is downwards. We still generate around 25 percent of global economic output, which is good considering we comprise only seven percent of the population. But we also account for nearly 50 percent of global social expenditure. That shows the magnitude of the challenge facing us. That is why innovation capacity and competitiveness are key issues for Europe.
 In the euro area in particular we must be careful to ensure that as well as achieving fiscal soundness we manage to harmonise our economic power, and I use the word “power” advisedly. I don’t mean that all the eurozone economies should be the same. That would be wrong. We have quite different strengths and weaknesses. But we must address the issue of competitiveness in a consistent manner. We cannot have a situation, for example, where some in the eurozone spend less than one percent on research and development and others more than three percent. That will lead in the long term to great economic imbalances which a currency system on its own cannot withstand. That is why I am grateful to the OECD for placing a special emphasis on competitiveness and on the question of how we proceed. Within the eurozone I would like to see us conclude binding agreements with the Commission on economic issues which would oblige us to make certain improvements.
 Let me now turn to Germany. We are Europe’s largest economy and as such we bear a great responsibility. There are some good things going for Germany, which we are proud of and pleased about. But we must not close our eyes to the fact that of course we too need to make improvements in some areas.
 Before Germany joined the single currency, the value of the Deutschmark was relatively high. The introduction of the euro required us to take steps to adapt. Basically, we had to carry out structural reforms earlier than others did. In Germany, interest rates on government bonds did not fall with the introduction of the euro but remained virtually the same. In other countries, interest rates fell sharply. That created a situation in which those countries apparently had more scope for consumption. After the major financial crisis it was really a stroke of luck that Germany was relatively well-prepared in structural terms to play a leading role in overcoming this crisis.
However, that does not mean that in a few years’ time we may not find ourselves back in a situation where we will again be obliged to do more about structural factors because other countries are implementing far-reaching structural reforms now. If we look at unit wage costs, we can see a convergence between many eurozone countries. We can also see that one day we may again reach the point where unit wage costs in Germany are much too high in comparison with other European countries, though we have not yet reached that point.
 On the plus side I would note that we devote around three percent of our GDP to research and development. Another plus point for Germany is that in 2015, for the first time in decades, we intend not to contract any more new federal debt. This is prompted in part by demographic change. Germany’s debt currently runs at around 80 percent. We want to bring that back down to around 70 percent by 2020. In view of the demographic challenges facing us, we must ensure that we significantly reduce our total debt.
 For the time being our labour market situation is relatively sound. Nonetheless, long-term unemployment is stubborn. Yet we have to try to help young people particularly find a way out of long-term unemployment. We are still spending more than ten percent of our entire federal budget on benefits for the long-term unemployed. If we could cut a third off the 30 billion euros and more that we spend on long-term unemployment each year, we would have 10 billion euros more for future-oriented investments, for example in transport infrastructure.
 We have weaknesses, which I want to state quite clearly here. One is that where transport infrastructure is concerned we are living on borrowed time. We also have our hands full with the tasks of driving forward digital technology and building modern broadband infrastructure. We must focus on these challenges. In addition, we keep hearing the recurring criticism that we are too insular when it comes to services. This is another issue we have to get to grips with, though it is very difficult, I can tell you, to take privileges away from particular interest groups.
 But the greatest challenge facing Germany concerns energy policy. Here too, with the new government, the grand coalition, we have a Herculean task before us. The point is that a considerable proportion of power generated – nearly a quarter of the total – already comes from renewable energy sources. Renewable energies are no longer a niche but are central to energy policy. They already basically account for the highest proportion of power generation, although the availability of that power varies considerably over time. That raises entirely new questions which we have to address.
 We have now reached an agreement with France to take a joint look at so-called capacity markets, i.e. to work towards a common energy market along the lines of the single European market. In Germany, we have the problem that a very large number of people now benefit from financial support for renewable energies. When in a democracy more than half the people benefit from a subsidy, it is no easy matter to do away with the subsidy by democratic means. It takes a great deal of reasoning and considerable powers of persuasion. That is why I believe that as the grand coalition we have a real opportunity here.
 We have a problem with the Commission which we have to talk about. The competitiveness of energy-intensive industries is at stake. Gas prices in the United States – and you know this better than I – are currently half or a third the level of gas prices in Europe. Consequently we have real problems keeping energy-intensive industries in Europe. It will therefore be very important that the Commission, with its rules on subsidies, does not put obstacles in our path with regard to the operation of our energy-intensive industries. We still need a primary industry in Europe for materials like steel, aluminium, copper and so on.
 In the European Union we must ensure that we retain or regain certain essential skills. I believe that what we are seeing at present is a comprehensive transformation of the whole sphere of industrial production through the merging of digital technology and the Internet with conventional industry. In Germany we call this “Industry 4.0”. In Germany we have skills galore when it comes to car-making, mechanical engineering and the chemical industry. But we have few skills of our own when it comes to chip-making, Internet firms and software production, with the exception of SAP. The same goes for large parts of Europe. What we have to understand is that without the capacity for full integration through modern information and communication technologies, today’s mechanical engineers will have no future. Working with devices which can communicate with one another is only possible with the right software skills and hardware capacities. Given that software production and chip-making will become increasingly dovetailed, the real challenge for Europe lies in the digital sphere if we are not to find ourselves structurally dependent on America and Asia, something we cannot really want to happen. We have to discuss this issue because it demands a concerted European response. It is not something that any one EU Member State could achieve single-handedly. Here again we can see the advantage of a common European engagement. We have seen it in the aviation industry; now we have to achieve the same success in the digital sphere. If we hadn’t made the effort with EADS when we did, there would now be only one dominant aircraft maker, Boeing, and perhaps some up-and-coming Chinese manufacturers.
 So I thank the OECD for consistently rubbing salt into our wounds, and for praising us, too, every so often. We need that as well to keep going.
 Here’s to cooperation!
Secretary-General António Guterres,
Prime Minister, Boris,
President of COP 26 Alok Sharma,
Svenja Schulze,
Ladies and gentlemen,
 
We naturally want COP 26 in Glasgow to be a success. Germany will do its part to make this happen. We also all agree, I think, that the world needs it to be a success. And our climate dialogue today and tomorrow is of course dedicated to precisely this goal.
 
The Petersberg Climate Dialogue has already become a tradition. I launched it in 2010 after the failure of the Copenhagen conference the previous year. We needed to rebuild trust for new negotiations. I believe that the Petersberg Climate Dialogue has proven effective in this regard and has become integral to international climate policy. My thanks naturally go to Svenja Schulze and the Environment Ministry for all of the preparations.
 
We have come to speak of climate neutrality as a shared global goal. Progress towards this goal depends on two crucial factors: national ambition on the one hand and international solidarity on the other.
 
I will begin by saying something about national ambition. All states are called upon to develop new nationally determined contributions and long-term strategies. The European Union has already sent out a clear message. By 2030, we want to reduce our CO2 emissions by at least 55 percent as against 1990.
 
Many other states have also announced that they will be increasing their national contributions to climate change mitigation. For example, President Biden recently introduced a new 2030 target for the US. Boris Johnson has set the United Kingdom an ambitious goal for 2035. Canada and Japan have also defined new goals which make it clear that they are ready to do more. It would be good, if I may be perfectly honest, if we could all agree on comparable figures as a basis for our goals, because we currently have such a confusing array of different years as starting points and target dates that it is impossible to compare them without a conversion table on hand.
 
In Germany, we have mapped out our route to climate neutrality with the Federal Climate Change Act. We are working hard to implement this act, for example by phasing out coal and further expanding renewables. We plan to continue developing and fleshing out these goals. As Svenja Schulze has already mentioned, the Federal Constitutional Court has issued a ground-breaking ruling which requires us to give greater consideration to intergenerational equity in our climate change mitigation efforts and to map out the path to climate neutrality in greater detail. We will therefore raise our national reduction target for 2030 by ten percent, to 65%, and will aim to be climate neutral as soon as 2045. This means that we will have to modify our sector-specific targets. But we are not contenting ourselves with just an agreement on objectives. Our Climate Change Act stipulates that, if progress is insufficient, an immediate action programme will be initiated to allow us to meet the targets.
 
In the interests of future generations around the world, it is essential that we act rapidly and resolutely to limit the dramatic effects of global warming. The EU, too, has chosen to use legislation to establish its new climate goal for 2030 and its goal of greenhouse gas neutrality by 2050 as binding benchmarks. The Commission will present proposals for implementation in the summer. We may then have to adjust our national programmes once more to align them with the European Union’s methodology.
 
I believe carbon pricing to be a particularly suitable steering instrument. The EU emissions trading system has shown that this works in the field of energy. It thus makes sense to expand it to other sectors such as heating and transport. In Germany, we have already done precisely this. Looking at the timescale, we want to enable market mechanisms to have an effect as soon as possible. In my view, it would be highly desirable to have carbon pricing at a global level, too. This would have to be established step by step, of course. I would like to encourage you to promote this market-oriented and thus highly efficient instrument which will help smooth our shared path to climate neutrality. Pricing is, of course, an approach which we can use to give all technologies a chance.
 
Of course, the starting point for effective national climate change mitigation measures is not the same everywhere; in fact, it varies significantly. But we are reliant on everyone to do their part. That is, we need international solidarity – not only in the reduction of emissions through technology transfer, for example, but in particular when it comes to climate adaptation and resilience. With the global NDC partnership and with InsuResilience, the global partnership for insuring climate risks, Germany has helped launch important initiatives in this field.
 
Industrialised countries had previously pledged to mobilise an annual sum of 100 billion US dollars from public and private funds up until 2020 to finance climate action. And we had also agreed to extend this target until 2025. However, the latest OECD figures for 2018 show that we must do more if we are to keep our promise.
 
Germany has gone above and beyond its own promise to double its public funding to four billion euro by 2020; this sum reached over 4.3 billion euro the previous year. We also provide significant funding via development and promotional loans. The total German contribution from all sources – public and private – was almost 7.6 billion euro in 2019, and on a similar level in 2020. I believe this is a fair contribution on the part of Germany.
 
But we must now also look to the future, because we must continue our international efforts. The need for financing in developing countries in particular is enormous. I thus second what Boris Johnson has just said. At the next COP in Glasgow, we must discuss a new financing target for the period from 2025. The new target should also send out a clear message. Instead of new fossil fuel power plants, renewable energies should be funded – around the world. Germany is prepared to make a fair contribution to a new financing target for the years after 2025, too.
 
I spoke with Boris Johnson yesterday and we agreed that we want to do everything we can, together, to make progress on this goal and ensure that the COP in Glasgow is a success. This includes private investors around the world investing in climate change mitigation. There is no doubt that significantly more private capital must be mobilised if we are to move closer to climate neutrality. Of course, we also need to see major progress across the different industries, and this progress will primarily be achieved when it becomes very clear that climate change mitigation is financially viable. E-mobility, photovoltaics and green hydrogen are examples of modern technologies which are becoming increasingly significant in this context.
 
The UK COP Presidency has launched campaigns surrounding these issues. I would like to thank Prime Minister Johnson most sincerely for these efforts. I expressly support your commitment to making climate change mitigation one focus of your G7 presidency. The G7 summit in Cornwall should send out a clear message in favour of protecting the climate and biodiversity. Finally, we also want to make this year’s COP in Kunming a success for biodiversity. One crucial element of this is the protection of our rainforests and oceans, an area where progress must be made. Protecting biodiversity will, not least, help to reduce the likelihood of future pandemics. Germany makes a major contribution to these efforts, providing 500 million euro per year.
 
It is true that protecting the climate and biodiversity requires a great deal of work and investment. But it is also true that failing to ensure this protection, or sufficient protection, would entail far higher costs – not just financial costs, but those caused by the loss of living space and habitats, essential resources and human lives. We have come together for this 12th Petersberg Climate Dialogue because we are united by the goal of keeping the promises made with the Paris Agreement, and of limiting climate change so that future generations can enjoy a life worth living and the rights and freedoms to choose how they live on our Earth. To reach this goal we must act today, and act ambitiously. At the same time, we must act together and in a spirit of solidarity. Thank you all for doing your part.
 
Distinguished guests,
Excellencies,
Citizens of the partner cities of Reims and Aachen,
Esteemed students and pupils,
President of the French Republic, Emmanuel,
Ladies and gentlemen,
 
Today is an important day for the Franco‑German friendship. With the Treaty of Aachen, we are renewing the foundation of cooperation between our countries. We are reaffirming our intention to tackle the great challenges of our time side by side. We are doing this in Aachen, the principle residence of Charlemagne, the one whom we call the Father of Europe. We are doing this therefore in a place that stands both for the historic similarity between Germany and France and for the point of departure of very different paths of development. We are signing this Treaty on the 56th anniversary of the Élysée Treaty of 1963. We are signing the Treaty of Aachen – a document that sets out the framework for our future cooperation.
 
Emmanuel Macron, just eight months ago you were awarded the Charlemagne Prize at this very spot – for your commitment to Europe, for your ideas for Europe and for your ideas regarding the cooperation between our two countries.
 
In view of the long era of rivalry and war between our countries, the fact that we are meeting like this today is not something that can be taken for granted. We should keep on reminding ourselves of this fact. It was only after the Second World War, which Germany brought to Europe during the National Socialist era, that we achieved understanding, reconciliation and ultimately friendship – a friendship that has now become deeply rooted in our societies. History thus took a turn that could not have been any more fortunate for us.
 
We remember the foresight and determination of Konrad Adenauer and Charles de Gaulle. They drove forward this process with the Élysée Treaty and made it irreversible. We remember many other courageous politicians and masterminds who devoted themselves to the Franco‑German friendship with all their might. I would like to mention Valéry Giscard d’Estaing and Helmut Schmidt here, as well as Helmut Kohl and François Mitterrand. Just as important are the thousands of mayors and leaders in our partner cities, those responsible for the 180 academic exchange programmes and the eight million people who have been given the opportunity to get to know each other over the years thanks to the Franco‑German Youth Office. Allow me to welcome representatives from all of these groups here today.
 
The fact that all of this came about was by no means something to be taken for granted. It was by no means as easy as it sometimes appears today in retrospect. The history of the origins and above all the ratification of the Élysée Treaty 56 years ago was a thorny path, to borrow a metaphor that was often employed at that time. As a rose‑grower, Konrad Adenauer knew what he was talking about. And yet the Élysée Treaty helped to turn the Franco‑German friendship into a unique relationship.
 
Why are we signing a new treaty today, supplemented by an agreement between our two parliaments, which will, in the future, work together in a structured manner in a parliamentary assembly consisting of 50 parliamentarians from each country? Why are we implementing the proposal made by French President Emmanuel Macron in his speech at the Sorbonne in September 2017 just 16 months down the line? We are doing so because we are living in exceptional times, and also because we need decisive, unambiguous, clear and forward‑looking responses in this day and age.
 
On the one hand, the Europe of today can hardly be compared with that of 1963 – neither in terms of the depth of integration nor as far as the number of its member states is concerned. On the other hand, populism and nationalism are on the rise in all our countries. The UK’s withdrawal marks the first time that a country is leaving the EU. Multilateralism is coming under fire around the world – whether in climate cooperation, world trade, the acceptance of international institutions, even the United Nations. Seventy‑four years – a lifetime – after the end of the Second World War, things that seemed to be self‑evident are being called into question once again.
 
This is why we need, firstly, to recast our responsibility within the EU – the responsibility of Germany and France in this European Union. This is why we need, secondly, to redefine the direction of our cooperation. And thirdly, this is why we need a common understanding of our international role, one that can lead to joint action. This is why, fourthly, we need common ground in the daily lives of our two peoples – in institutions, above all in the day‑to‑day coexistence of our peoples, and in the border region in particular.
 
The new Treaty, the Treaty of Aachen, consists of seven chapters and 28 articles. We are very deliberately starting out with the chapter entitled “European affairs”. We are part of the European Union and we want to help ensure that it succeeds. I am particularly grateful to the representatives of the European institutions, to you, Jean‑Claude Juncker, to you, Donald Tusk, and to you, Klaus Iohannis, for being here today. This reflects what we want to express with this Treaty.
 
The fact that the second chapter of the Treaty addresses questions of peace and security is also no coincidence. Integrated into our common systems of collective security, we, Germany and France, pledge to offer one another any form of assistance and support that we can in the event of an armed attack on our respective territories. This includes military means. This sounds very simple and obvious, but it is not. And so we discussed each and every word at length. However, this is the necessary conclusion that we must draw from the breathtaking path that our peoples have trodden.
 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank the French President once again for inviting me to join the ceremonies commemorating the centenary of the end of the First World War. We visited Compiègne, the place where the armistice was signed in 1918. The journey from that day to this, to our commitment to help each other, is simply breathtaking. We are grateful that we were able to make this journey.
 
We are committed to developing a common military culture, a common defence industry and a common approach to arms exports. In so doing, we intend to help to create a European army. This will only work, however, if this goes hand in hand with efforts to coordinate our foreign policy. Those who are aware of the many things that happen each day also know what it means when we commit together now to assuming foreign policy responsibility and to standing up for our interests. However, this will only work if we improve the way in which we coordinate our development policy. Our neighbouring continent of Africa is a particularly important part of this.
 
This Treaty is about our future, and this applies to the fields of culture, education, research and mobility, as well as to sustainable development, climate and environmental protection and economic affairs. France and Germany want to and must set the pace in the areas of the future that are key to the prosperity of our European Union.
 
We know that we can only safeguard social cohesion if we are economically successful, if education plays a key role and if our culture accords us the freedom we need. We also know that time is of the essence and that the world does not sleep. Europe has been unable to keep its promise from the year 2000 to become the world’s leading continent. We must catch up in many areas. Our resolve to complete the European internal market is part of this. We must create a digital single market, and we must coordinate our research areas, in particular in the field of artificial intelligence. We must develop common platforms. These are just a few examples of the wide range of tasks that lie before us.
 
Achieving the integration towards a Franco‑German economic area with common rules, an objective stated by the Treaty, involves a great deal of work that remains to be done. This entails harmonising legislation in the respective areas. We want to consider the future of work together. We are capable of doing so much more to coordinate our labour market policy. Only in this way will we be able to achieve our objective, namely convergence between our economies. Driving the energy transition forward is part of this, of course. We are all aware of our different positions with respect to nuclear energy, renewable energies and coal. This is therefore a major task.
 
The border regions are to play a pioneering role in this common area of coexistence. I believe this to be a welcome chapter in this Treaty. From a French perspective, this is perhaps even an unusual chapter, because we, as federalists, are aware, of course, that we have Minister‑Presidents in Germany who have at least as much say as the Federal Government. France is structured differently, however.
 
It is no coincidence that we are here in Aachen today – in a city that not only stands for the history of our two countries, but also for the many cities in the border regions along our almost 500 km‑long border. The people in these regions should develop new forms of cooperation. They should tell us about their experiences and will be accorded special room for manoeuvre. They can change administrative regulations. You know what it means if not everyone who is generally responsible pays attention to such matters.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, these are only some objectives that we have set for ourselves. I believe that the Treaty of Aachen constitutes an excellent framework for this. However – and we must remind ourselves of this today – this does not mean that our work is done. Life must be breathed into the Treaty – day by day.
 
I know from my own experience how sluggish our responses to new challenges often are, how determinedly decisions are postponed and how often we claim that something is not possible right now. That is why the question as to whether this Treaty is based on the desire to bring it to life is crucial. On behalf of the Federal Government, especially on behalf of my colleagues who are here today, and also on behalf of those who are unable to be here today, allow me to say this: yes, we have an unswerving desire to do just that. I know that our federal states see this in just the same way. I know that countless organisations are waiting precisely for a signal such as this in order to be able to further Franco‑German cooperation in the spirit of Europe.
 
We will have to work hard to ensure that we continue to understand each other even better, not only linguistically, but also mentally and organisationally, that we treat each other out of respect for our different cultures and perceive this to be an enrichment of our own culture, and that we can get as many people on board as possible. I am aware that this is an arduous task. However, infinite enrichment lies at the end of this path. I would like to pledge here – and also on behalf of the entire Federal Government – that we will do this with all our heart and soul.
 Long live the Franco‑German friendship!’
Mr President, Rik Daems, Secretary General, President of the Court, Members of the Parliamentary Assembly, distinguished colleagues,
The Federal Republic of Germany became a full member of the Council of Europe 70 years ago. This membership was an important step towards being able to assume international responsibility once more. Only a few years after the Second World War unleashed by Germany and after the Shoah, Germany’s betrayal of all civilised values, the hand of reconciliation was held out to my country. That truly was a gesture of good faith. The Council of Europe was the first European organisation as well as the first international organisation to accept Germany back into the international community.
The hardships of daily life in the post‑war period left many people facing an uncertain future. All the more remarkable, therefore, was the far‑sightedness of statesmen of the time who had a vision for the future – a united Europe. One of these figures was Winston Churchill, who said in Zürich in 1946: “If Europe were once united in the sharing of its common inheritance, there would be no limit to the happiness, to the prosperity and glory which its three or four hundred million people would enjoy.”
With the establishment of the Council of Europe, this vision began to take shape. This was coupled with the hope of a better future – the promise of being able to live together in peace, freedom and prosperity; a promise, however, which could only be fulfilled for the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe many years later after the Iron Curtain had been consigned to history. The establishment and work of the Council of Europe encapsulates our self‑perception as Europeans – the values which have shaped and hold together our societies, and the basic expectations which we have of the member states. The Council of Europe has always regarded itself as having an obligation to strengthen human rights, democracy and the rule of law.
The adoption of the European Convention on Human Rights in 1950 reflected a new understanding of the individual and the role of the state. Citizens are not objects of their state but have extensive rights and freedoms. The state must respect and protect these rights. The Council of Europe should therefore raise the alarm when they are jeopardised in any member state.
The Council of Europe went even one step further: it made it possible for citizens to lodge an application with the European Court of Human Rights against their own state if they believed that their rights and freedoms were not being respected. That was revolutionary – and it’s an achievement of which we can still be proud today. From Lisbon to Vladivostok, this court is the court of last instance for victims of human rights violations.
Looking back today, we can say that many hopes of the post‑war period for a better future have been fulfilled. Today, Europe is the continent with the highest human rights standards in the world. The European model of democratic welfare states and market economies guarantees a quality of life which many people around the world envy – just think of education, healthcare and political stability. In part, we owe these very assets to the existence and work of the Council of Europe.
If we look to Europe’s external borders and to Eastern Europe, however, we see that even today peace and security as well as stability and prosperity certainly cannot be taken for granted. The situation in Belarus, in eastern Ukraine and in Crimea, in Transnistria, South Ossetia, Abkhazia, Nagorno‑Karabakh or, of course, in Syria and Libya is, in some cases, extremely troubling. In all of these places, we see that human and fundamental rights, not least freedom of opinion and of the press, are under pressure and are indeed being eroded.
If we allow this to happen or simply look away when fundamental values and rights, which form the core of the constitutions of democratic states, are disregarded, then we would risk the European project itself being called into question. For how seriously we take the human rights situation in other countries always shows how seriously we take the protection of basic values in our own countries.
For that reason, we gave particular priority to the rule of law during Germany’s Presidency of the Council of the European Union last year. That also goes for our current Presidency of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe. The rule of law is indispensable if citizens are to have trust and confidence in the state and its institutions. Citizens must be able to rely on the state to uphold the laws passed by parliament while accepting the oversight of independent judges. This very trust is crucial to a functioning and thus stable democracy. However, we all know that trust can evaporate. Representatives of the state have to work anew every day to earn it.
Only if citizens have sufficient trust will we be able to overcome crises such as the COVID‑19 pandemic. In many respects, however, this is a huge challenge – for our health services and research community, as well as for our economies and social cohesion. The pandemic is undoubtedly also a litmus test for our democracies. The curtailment of personal freedoms in order to tackle the pandemic must meet strict conditions and requires special justification. It must be of limited duration, necessary, appropriate and proportionate.
The rule of law creates trust that social cohesion can be maintained not only within our own societies. For international cooperation, if it is to serve the welfare of everyone, can only work on the foundation of a rules‑based order – that is to say through jointly agreed rules that everyone observes. A reliable order of this nature is the basis for peaceful and also economically profitable relations among states. For companies and investors need legal certainty in order to be able to plan and calculate sensibly. If they take risks, then they have to be sure that, if the worst comes to the worst and they are confronted with a breach of contract or a violation of the law, they will be able to take their case to an independent court. Therefore, anyone who seeks to bolster legal certainty is boosting prosperity at the same time.
Alongside its commitment to the rule of law, the Council of Europe is also making a very important contribution towards greater international reliability with its fight against corruption. What’s more, a rules‑based order is a key prerequisite for peaceful coexistence. It runs contrary to our shared fundamental values when the sovereignty and integrity of states is called into question and disregarded, as we have witnessed in Crimea or in Nagorno‑Karabakh. The Council of Europe can play a key role here, but only if all institutions of the Council of Europe work closely together.
I can therefore only encourage you, President Daems, to continue to resolutely strive for close cooperation based on trust – between governments and parliamentarians of the member states as well as between the Parliamentary Assembly and the Committee of Ministers. A positive sign of such cooperation is the new joint mechanism which the Council of Europe can use to react appropriately through dialogue to any violations of its basic standards.
A rules‑based international order is also necessary in light of the major challenges of our time, which no country can master on its own. That applies to the COVID‑19 pandemic, climate change mitigation or the rapid developments in cyberspace with all their opportunities but also risks. The security of users can only be guaranteed on a cross‑border basis. The Council of Europe has a role to play here when it comes to protecting human rights, democracy and the rule of law, for example in the use of artificial intelligence – a focus of our Presidency of the Committee of Ministers. You are also addressing this very issue in the Parliamentary Assembly. I very much welcome that. For even in the digital world, the individual and their dignity must always take centre stage.
Human rights can only be fully protected in a constitutional order in which the separation of powers and the independence of the judiciary are respected. We should therefore be all the more concerned when today the separation of powers is called into question and the independence of courts is curtailed – even in some EU member states.
The European Court of Human Rights is open to more than 800 million people in Europe when they believe that their rights – although enshrined in the European Convention on Human Rights – are being violated in their respective national legal system. Unfortunately, however, the Court’s judgments are often executed either at a snail’s pace, only partially or not at all. Especially in cases where individuals have been wrongly imprisoned, the implementation of the judgments, that is to say the liberation of the detainees, is particularly urgent and necessary. Our obligations in the Council of Europe with regard to protecting human rights are not negotiable. That’s why national law cannot have precedence over the obligations under the Convention. The Venice Commission of the Council of Europe made this abundantly clear in its opinions.
It’s important that the Council of Europe and the European Union work together effectively on matters relating to fundamental values and rights. I’m therefore pleased that the negotiations on the EU’s accession to the European Convention on Human Rights were resumed during Germany’s Presidency of the Council of the EU and are now moving forward. Accession would close a gap in the European system for protecting human rights and that, I believe, is in the interests of us all.
May 2021 marks the tenth anniversary of the Istanbul Convention’s opening for signature. This Convention sets down unparalleled international benchmarks for the protection of women from violence, especially against domestic violence. I therefore deeply regret Turkey’s withdrawal from the Convention. I hoped that it would remain a member. I also hope that member states, especially those within the European Union which have not yet ratified the Convention, will do so soon.
Women’s rights are human rights. Violence against women must not be ignored. It’s a crime; and as such, violence against women must be named and prosecuted. This is all the more important as it has transpired that violence against women has increased against the backdrop of the current crisis. I therefore urge you all to foster support for this Convention and its full implementation in your home countries.
Ladies and gentlemen, 70 years ago Chancellor Adenauer compared the Council of Europe to a European conscience. Since then, the times and with them the challenges have changed, but not the fundamental values on which Europe is based and which constitute the European identity.
All of you shoulder political responsibility. Today, you are all part of the European conscience. I encourage you to stay vigilant and committed in order to breathe life into Europe’s fundamental values, in order to draw attention to human rights violations and to ensure that human rights are respected.
Thank you. And I’m now looking forward to your questions. Of course, I can’t answer them all – there are more than 70 – but we still have some time and I’d like to answer as many as possible. Thank you very much.
Mr Schuster,
Ms Knobloch,
Minister‑President, Markus Söder,
Members of the Bavarian Cabinet,
President of the Landtag,
Your Highness,
Mr Mayor,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Permit me to express my most sincere gratitude to the World Jewish Congress for presenting me with the Theodor Herzl Award. I consider this to be a great honour.
I especially wish to thank you, Ambassador Lauder, for what you have you just said – for your words of generosity and appreciation, and also for your words of concern and warning.
When Theodor Herzl penned his book “The Jewish State” at the end of the 19th century, he dreamed of a safe homeland for the world’s Jews in the face of widespread antisemitism. Despite all of the discrimination and persecution, Herzl could not have foreseen even in his very worst nightmares what was to happen a little over three decades later, namely the betrayal of all civilised values that was the Shoa, committed in Germany during the National Socialist era. This crime against humanity or – as the Auschwitz survivor and long-standing President of the Central Council of Jews in Germany Heinz Galinski once called it – “this crime towards humanity” involved breaking with all civilised principles.
It therefore fills me with humility that I, as Germany’s Federal Chancellor – in other words, on behalf of our country – am able to accept the Theodor Herzl Award today. I therefore consider this award ceremony to be a symbol of the trust that Jewish communities around the world and the World Jewish Congress in Germany place in Germany. I cannot be grateful enough for this trust.
It is and remains something that cannot be taken for granted, and I continue to be greatly moved when people such as Margot Friedländer, who witnessed and survived the Shoah, decide after many decades and at a grand old age, to return from exile abroad to Germany, in Friedländer’s case to her home city of Berlin. Almost 75 years after the end of the Holocaust, Jewish communities in Germany number 100,000 members once again. The Israelite Congregation of Munich that we are visiting today is one of the biggest Jewish communities in Germany.
Ms Knobloch, thank you so much for being our host today and for preparing everything so wonderfully for us. Please also extend our thanks to all of your staff. The atmosphere here is quite wonderful.
At your centre, you can experience how diverse and vibrant Jewish life is in our country, and I have had an opportunity to gain an impression of this myself.
Rabbis are being ordained in Germany while Jewish kindergartens and educational institutions are being founded and synagogues reconstructed. Jewish life, culture and history are part of Germany’s identity, and Jewish life and Jewish culture must be supported. It is with this in mind that the Federal Government recently increased funding for construction projects. I need only mention the Federation’s involvement in the new construction of a synagogue in Dessau.
Jewish life in Germany must be both promoted and protected. It is, unfortunately, a sad fact to have to emphasise how important protecting Jewish life is right now. We have been aware of this not just since the attack on the synagogue in Halle on 9 October – Yom Kippur – which struck at the core of our entire society. This horrific crime fills us with deep shame. The fact that Jewish people are exposed to threats even in 2019 shows that we must never slacken our efforts to defend the fundamental values of our society and to apply them in our everyday lives.
It is over five years since we gathered for a major demonstration at the Brandenburg Gate in September 2014 in the wake of antisemitic incidents. “Stand up! Never again hatred of the Jews!” – that was the slogan we heard at the time. I wish that I could say today that this appeal had borne lasting fruit, but, unfortunately, I cannot do that. The scourge of antisemitism is still at large in Germany. All of us must be greatly concerned by the most recent developments – and not only by the attack in Halle.
According to a survey by the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, 89 percent of the Jewish people in Germany questioned perceived an increase in antisemitism. The number of antisemitic crimes rose by almost 20 percent in the past year alone. Antisemitic utterances are being made ever more frequently and without restraint – particularly on the internet. These developments are deeply worrying. They impact Jewish people in our country, but by no means them alone. After all, they are targeted against all of us together, against Jewish and non-Jewish people, against everything that sustains and holds our country together, our values and freedoms. They strike at the core of our coexistence as they are the expression of a deeply anti-democratic attitude.
Those who violate human dignity, enshrined in Article 1 of our Basic Law, violate the peaceful and thriving coexistence of us all. The dignity of each individual human being shall be inviolable – this pledge at the beginning of our Basic Law is an obligation. It applies to all people in our country, irrespective of their religion, skin colour, origin, gender or sexual orientation.
The fact that we have experienced how the promise of protection made by our country with respect to the Jews in Germany has not always been fully fulfilled – and instead, for example, only the strong wooden door of a synagogue saved the faithful gathered together in that place of worship from a massacre – weighs all the more heavily.
We must never accept that people in Germany have to live in fear on account of their religion. Rather, we must do everything in our power to ensure that Jews in Germany can live in freedom and security. Incidentally, antisemitism and racism are not first manifested in acts of violence, but much earlier, more subtly. And we cannot wake up only when words give way to deeds. We have to take action before then.
In a few days’ time, ladies and gentlemen, we will call to mind 9 November, which is such a fateful day in German history. On the 80th anniversary of the Reichspogromnacht, I had the honour last year to speak at the central commemorative event at the synagogue in Rykestraße in Berlin. I would like to recapitulate a train of thought from this that continues to be important to me. It had to do with the fact that we humans tend at important commemorative events such as 9 November to focus our minds exclusively on these days and easily overlook the fact that they usually do not happen in isolation, but are part of a wider process.
9 November 1938 did not occur in isolation. We all know what happened next. However, there was a pre-history to these events. Hatred of the Jews has existed in Europe since the Middle Ages and was primarily religious at first. Racially motivated antisemitism emerged in the 19th century, during which social issues became pressing with the Industrial Revolution and secular nation states were in the ascendant. All of this led to the cataclysm that culminated in the betrayal of all civilised values that was the Shoa.
I firmly believe that we can only learn the right lessons from the horrors of the past for us today and in the future if we consider the November pogroms of 1938 to be part of a process that was not only followed by the terrible chapter that was the Shoah, but also had a pre-history. This pre-history was accompanied by a large majority of the German population looking the other way, remaining silent and indifferent and going with the flow.
Today, ladies and gentlemen, we are once again living at a time of profound technological and global change. At times such as these, there is always a particularly great danger that those who respond to the difficulties and consequences of these upheavals with simple answers – simple answers that all too often go hand in hand with a brutalisation of language on the streets and the internet – gain in support. We must take a firm stand against the onset of such trends. And we means, first and foremost, our country. I say this expressly in my capacity as Federal Chancellor.
Politicians and the state must protect their citizens with all the means available to a constitutional state. Our constitutional state cannot stand idly by and allow people to be verbally abused, threatened or attacked when they profess to be Jewish. It cannot stand idly by and allow a Jewish mother and her children to have stones thrown at them. It cannot stand idly by and allow security personnel at the synagogue on Oranienburger Straße in Berlin to be attacked.
It is therefore vital that the Federal Government adopt its package of measures for tackling right-wing extremism and hate crime the day after tomorrow. We will introduce a reporting obligation for providers. Service providers are to be obligated to report hate crime on the internet to the security authorities. We will set up a central office at the Federal Criminal Police Office to this end. Stiffer penalties against hate speech and aggressive insults are also planned. It is especially important that the dialogue among security authorities be strengthened in the fight against right-wing extremism. The same goes for prevention work to tackle right-wing extremism, racism and antisemitism. We will improve the protection of local politicians, i.e. those working on the ground in cities and communities and will adjust the criminal justice system to this end. With this package of measures, we are doing everything in our power to ensure that words do not become deeds. We will expand positive initiatives and existing measures. And we will build up new structures where there are gaps.
Moreover, the office of the Federal Government Commissioner for Jewish Life in Germany and the Fight against Anti-Semitism was created at the beginning of this legislative term, in May 2018. The Commissioner coordinates the various measures for tackling antisemitism and therefore does his part in working towards a package of measures for tackling right-wing extremism and hate crime.
In all that we are doing, we are taking the working definition of antisemitism of the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance as our guide. This working definition was adopted with Germany’s support and the Federal Government endorsed it in 2017.
Incidentally, it is right that most of the fields of action for fighting antisemitism fall within the competence of the Länder. However, it is also right that we are all resolved together not to be hampered in our fight against antisemitism and right-wing extremism by discussions on jurisdiction between the Federal Government and the Länder. This is why we have a joint Federation-Länder Commission to fight antisemitism in which we are pooling all of our forces to tackle right-wing extremist and Islamist-motivated antisemitism – and also to tackle antisemitism that is targeted against the security and existence of the State of Israel.
European and international dialogue is indispensable to this end. Regular consultations are therefore held with France and Israel on the issue of combating antisemitism. Moreover, we want to strengthen European cooperation especially in this area during Germany’s European Council Presidency in the second half of next year.
This is also important in view of the concerns of the Jewish community surrounding Islamist-motivated antisemitism as a result of the immigration and displacement of Muslim people to Germany. It is good that we can count on support from strong and committed partners in civil society particularly in this regard. I am thinking here, for example, of organisations that promote the Jewish-Muslim dialogue, of the Kreuzberg Initiative against Anti-Semitism that devises and implements educational projects, and also of the memorial sites that have developed special programmes on the issues of displacement and migration.
At the international level, the World Jewish Congress is a prominent partner in the fight against racism and antisemitism. I am extremely grateful to the World Jewish Congress for its commitment to the concerns of Jewish people around the world.
Ladies and gentlemen, Theodor Herzl’s dream of a Jewish State of Israel became a reality with its foundation in 1948. The fact that the State of Israel re-established diplomatic relations with the Federal Republic of Germany in 1965 – 20 years after the crimes against humanity that were the Shoah – was akin to a miracle. At any rate, this was an incredible vote of confidence for our country. We celebrated the 70th anniversary of the foundation of the State of Israel together last year. Then as now, I reiterated the fact that Israel’s security is and remains part of Germany’s raison d’état.
Germany and Israel are united by countless economic, scientific and personal relations. We are delighted to have such lively school and youth exchanges, and we have many town-twinning projects and friendship organisations. The governments of both of our countries hold intergovernmental consultations on a regular basis. Part of this is also the fact that the Federal Government continues, in spite of all the setbacks, to support a two-state solution – with Israel as a Jewish, democratic state in good neighbourliness with a viable Palestinian state.
Ladies and gentlemen, looking ahead, believing in a vision and making it a reality and working towards a bright future, full of conviction, with courage and creativity – these were features that distinguished Theodor Herzl. And so I consider this award that you have presented me with today and which bears his name to be an obligation for me to never simply make do with what we have achieved, but to work together with our partners to promote a bright future.
I would like to pass on the recognition that the World Jewish Congress has expressed by awarding the Theodor Herzl Award to all people in Germany who are committed to exchange and understanding and to combating antisemitism and exclusion. I would like to encourage all of them to continue to work with determination to promote the diversity and security of Jewish life in Germany. And I want to continue to do my part to this end.
Thank you very much.
Presidents,
Esteemed colleagues,
Esteemed colleagues from the parliaments,
Mr Ischinger,
Ladies and gentlemen,
 
And, of course, allow me also to welcome the Minister-President of the Free State of Bavaria. I believe that Munich is an excellent city to host this conference. Bavaria’s strength is on display in a very special way here. We have other beautiful cities in Germany, but Munich is taking centre-stage today.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are marking the 250th anniversary of Alexander von Humboldt’s birth in 2019. Alexander von Humboldt lived on the threshold of industrialisation. He was a scholar and traveller who was driven by the urge to understand and see the world as a whole, a passion that yielded a great deal of success. His motto, as his Mexican travel diary from the year 1803 reveals, was “everything is interaction”.
 
About 200 years later, in 2000, after researching the hole in the ozone layer and its chemical interactions, Nobel laureate Paul Crutzen concluded that we were embarking upon a new geochronological age. The Ice Age and the interglacial period are over, and we have now entered the Anthropocene. In 2016, this definition was subsequently adopted by the International Geological Congress. This means that we are living in an age in which humankind’s traces penetrate so deeply into the Earth that future generations will regard it as an entire age created by humans. These are traces of nuclear tests, population growth, climate change, exploitation of raw materials, and of microplastics in the oceans. And these are but a few examples of the things that we are doing today.
 
All of this has implications for global security and for the issues that are being discussed right here, right now. It therefore makes sense to take a look at how this conference started life in 1963 – as a conference on military science, or “Wehrkunde” in German, still dominated by the aftermath of the Second World War and National Socialism in Germany; an event with a particularly pronounced transatlantic focus. This is why I’m also delighted that so many representatives from the US are with us here today. We are meeting today at a comprehensive security conference, where we are discussing the energy supply, development cooperation and, of course, defence issues and a comprehensive approach to security. This is precisely the right response.
 
We must think in terms of interlinked structures, of which the military component is only one. But what we sense at the beginning of the 21st century – we are now in the second decade of the 21st century – is that the structures in which we operate are essentially those that emerged from the horrors of the Second World War and National Socialism, but that these structures are coming under incredible pressure because developments require them to undergo reform. However, I don’t think that we can simply take an axe to these structures. This is why the heading of this security conference is “The Great Puzzle”. Allow me to start with the first part of this topic. Rivalry between great powers – this alone offers us an insight into the fact that something that we regarded as a whole, as an architecture of the world, is under pressure, and is even likened to a puzzle, i.e. something that breaks up into pieces.
 
Thirty years ago – an anniversary that we are set to mark this year – the Berlin Wall fell, and with it the Iron Curtain disappeared. The Cold War came to an end. Back then, people asked themselves whether we still need an organisation like NATO. Today, we know that, yes, we need NATO as an anchor of stability in turbulent times. We need it as a community of shared values, because we should never forget that we established NATO not only as a military alliance, but also as a community of shared values in which human rights, democracy and the rule of law are the guiding principles of joint action.
 
The fact that NATO continues to be immensely attractive to this day became apparent to us in recent months during the wrangling over whether North Macedonia, as we can fortunately now all call this country, can also become a NATO member. I would simply like to thank the two principal players, Prime Minister Zoran Zaev from North Macedonia and Alexis Tsipras, the Greek Prime Minister, most sincerely for their courage. They will be presented with the Ewald von Kleist Award this evening for their efforts. In view of the many conflicts that we face today and for which we have yet to find a solution, this is a good example of how solutions can be found if we take a courageous approach. I had already given up thinking about further combinations of names in the meantime, because I thought it was a lost cause anyway. Now you have met with success. Permit me to offer you my most sincere congratulations on this achievement!
 
There are, however, a great number conflicts that challenge us, and this is the subject of the discussions that we are holding here. I would like to start with one issue that is a particular focus of my work, and also for many others among us, namely our relationship with Russia. Russia, in the form of the Soviet Union, was, in a manner of speaking, the antagonist during the Cold War. After the Berlin Wall fell, we certainly hoped – the NATO-Russia Founding Act came into being at that time – that we could make improvements to our coexistence. When I recall now how in 2011, on the fringes of this security conference, the instruments of ratification for the New START disarmament treaty were exchanged between Hillary Clinton and Sergey Lavrov, then today, in 2019, this feels like quite a long time ago. But back then, both Clinton and Lavrov hailed this as a milestone of the strategic partnership. I say this to illustrate what has happened in recent years and to point out that, on the other hand, things may look completely different again in a few years from now if the different sides work with each other. I would therefore like to thank Jens Stoltenberg most sincerely for not only invoking the NATO-Russia Founding Act time and again during the most difficult times we have had in recent years, but also for seeking dialogue. Thank you very much indeed for this!
 
Crimea was annexed in March 2014 – in what was a clear violation of international law – and then – Petro Poroshenko is here today – came the attack on eastern Ukraine, which was followed by a painstakingly negotiated ceasefire that was fragile but kept stable by the Minsk Agreement, with which Germany and France together with Russia and Ukraine are endeavouring to resolve the conflict. However, we must admit that we are far from achieving a solution; we must continue to work on this at all costs.
 
For us Europeans, if I may say so, the really bad news this year was the termination of the INF Treaty. After not decades, but years of violations of the terms of the treaty by Russia, this termination was inevitable. We all supported this as Europeans. Nevertheless, this is – and I say this to our American colleagues – a most interesting constellation. The US and Russia, as the legal successor to the Soviet Union, are terminating a treaty that was essentially agreed for Europe’s sake, a disarmament treaty that affects our security, and we, of course, with our elementary interests, will do everything in our power to facilitate further steps towards disarmament. Blind rearmament cannot be our response to this.
 
However, since a representative from China is here today, I would say that disarmament is something that concerns us all, and we would, of course, be pleased in this regard if such negotiations were held not only between the US, Europe and Russia, but also with China. I know that there are many reservations about this, and I don’t want to go into details about this right now. But we would welcome this.
 
In response to the events in Ukraine, we said in Wales in 2014 that not only the fight against terrorism, such as in Afghanistan, but also Alliance defence were once again at the forefront of our efforts. Back then, the objective of developing the military expenditure of each country towards two percent of its respective GDP was updated once again. I never tire of pointing out that this was already a goal at the beginning of the 2000s. All those who wanted to become new members of NATO were told at the outset that if they did not take steps in the direction of two percent, then they would not be admitted to NATO in the first place. – That was before my time as Federal Chancellor.
 
Germany is now facing criticism in this regard. I will address this matter later on. We have, however, increased our defence expenditure from 1.18 percent in 2014 to 1.35 percent. We aim to reach 1.5 percent by 2024. For many this is not enough, but for us it is an essential leap.
 
Of course, we must also ask ourselves what we’re doing with this money. Let me put it this way: if we all fall into recession and have no economic growth, then defence spending will be easier. But I’m not so sure that this will stand to benefit the Alliance. This is why it is important that we have such benchmarks. However, we must also consider what tangible contribution we are making.
 
Germany is doing its part. We have now been in Afghanistan for 18 years and have around 1300 German servicewomen and -men stationed there. We are working with 20 partner countries in northern Afghanistan. My most sincere request is that we – this is the first and only deployment under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty, which we have been engaged in together for a very long time – also discuss the issues of further development together. We have had to work hard to convince our people that our security is indeed being defended on the Hindu Kush. I really do not want to see us one day having to turn our backs on this and walk away as we have extremely interconnected capacities in the region.
 
We are a framework nation in Lithuania and have for the second time assumed the leadership of NATO’s spearhead force. I don’t want to list everything here. However, all of these are things that are very useful, especially as far as Alliance defence is concerned. We are therefore also prepared to do our part.
 
We are now playing an active role also outside NATO, for instance in Mali. For Germany, this is a giant step and one to which we are, culturally speaking, not as accustomed as our French friends. It was no coincidence that a discussion took place this morning between the President of the European Union during the rotating Presidency of the Council and the new President of the African Union, the Egyptian President Abdul Fattah Al-Sisi – congratulations on your election, which was just a few days ago.
 
The questions surrounding development in Africa and relations with Africa will challenge us as Europeans in a different way than, for example, the US. There will not always be NATO missions here. I would therefore ask you not to think of our efforts to achieve a coherent European defence policy as something that is directed against NATO, but as something that makes cooperation within NATO more efficient and feasible, because we can overcome many of the inefficiencies that exist among the many member states that are in the European Union and in NATO if we also develop a common military culture and if we improve the way in which our weapons systems are organised.
 
Germany is set to face a mammoth task in this regard, I can tell you. We now want to develop joint weapons systems. The issue of arms exports naturally also played a role in connection with the Treaty of Aachen, which we signed with France. If we in Europe do not have a common culture of arms exports, then the development of common weapons systems is, of course, at risk. In other words, we cannot talk about a European army and a common arms policy or arms development if we are not prepared at the same time to pursue a common arms export policy. We still have many complicated discussions on this subject ahead of us in Germany. I don’t think I’m telling you anything that you don’t already know here.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, alongside relations with Russia, the fight against terrorism is a major challenge for us, also in addition to the euro crisis, of course. In 2014/2015, we conducted very intensive negotiations with Greece about remaining in the eurozone. We then had to grapple with the refugee issue on a massive scale. The refugee issue has been fuelled by the situation in Syria, a civil war that has also been beset with terrorist challenges. The security issues that we faced were therefore of a very different nature compared with the ones that we face, for example, in the context of Alliance defence. Europe was forced to ask itself whether or not we are prepared to assume responsibility in an all-consuming humanitarian drama. That so many refugees came to Europe had to do with the fact that we had not previously addressed the situation of the refugees in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, where three million or more had already arrived. The stability of these countries was genuinely at risk. The upshot was refugees placing their trust in smugglers and traffickers and deciding to take their fate into their own hands.
 
Against this backdrop, Europe then embraced on a task – not just Germany, incidentally, but also Sweden, Austria and other countries: we provided assistance in a humanitarian emergency. But I think we all agree that states’ response to humanitarian emergencies cannot be for human traffickers and people smugglers to take control and for the refugees to be exposed to countless dangers, but that the right response was to create the EU-Turkey agreement.
 
For Germany, it was the right response to then also increase its expenditure on development assistance. During the same period – during the time when the Wales decisions to move towards two percent within NATO were adopted – we increased our development assistance expenditure to the same degree, because we are convinced that this, too, is a security issue. If we do not finally undertake sufficient payments for humanitarian assistance, for the Welthungerhilfe and for the UNHCR – and we are already one of the largest international donors – so that people’s livelihoods can be improved with their help, the refugee crisis will continue. The willingness of the German people, for example, to help, was outstanding, but we nonetheless need to solve the problems on the ground. That is what we are in the process of learning. So that was a parallel challenge that I consider as important from a security policy perspective as boosting our ability to honour our commitments within the Alliance.
 
Developments in Libya – also with regard to Europe or in this case Italy – have given us a foretaste of an issue that is becoming increasingly relevant: What direction will developments on the African continent take? In Libya, the instability of the state has resulted in this Libya becoming the starting point as it were for many African refugee flows, although our Spanish friends faced these challenges in connection with Morocco much earlier, ten or 15 years previously. That prompted the European Union to be much more consistent and resolute in developing the Partnership for Africa.
 
But let’s be honest: we are still in the early stages of this partnership. For if development in sub-Saharan Africa, but also in Egypt, in Morocco, in Tunisia and in Algeria does not progress in a way that gives young people opportunities and hope, that gives them prospects for a life in these countries, we will not be able to tackle the prosperity gap between Europe and Africa.
 
We can see that in recent years China has pursued development policy in Africa on a large scale in the form of investment. We can see that we in Europe have implemented traditional development policy to a considerable extent. I have often talked with President Xi Jinping about how we can learn from one another with regard to what each of us does well. But we have not yet drawn up a development policy agenda with which we could say that investment will ultimately create enough jobs to ensure security, peace and stability in these countries, too.
 
Again Germany has said the following, which in the early days of the Federal Republic of Germany was not an essential part of our historical understanding: Okay, we will support the G-5 Sahel troops, which are striving to fight terrorism. We are engaged in Mali and are working to tackle terrorism there in cooperation with the United Nations. We are on the ground in Mali working to train the armed forces. But all that will be in vain if these countries don’t have any economic prospects. And that is why we have increased our development assistance. But I want to reiterate that the methodology behind this development assistance has so far not been worked out in detail; that is something we can only do together with the African Union.
 
I am very pleased that the African Union now has clear strategic ideas – the Agenda 2063 and other plans – in which Africa is stating what it wants. For we need what these days is described as “ownership” in what has almost been adopted as a German word. People in Africa need to feel themselves: “These are our programmes.” If multilateral cooperation has improved in recent years, I have to say that in my view the African Union is certainly a good example of it.
 
So, ladies and gentlemen, those are the problems I wanted to outline for you and on which Germany is working. Now I want to turn to the question of the methodology of our cooperation. For the transatlantic alliance is, of course, in essence a defence alliance. The Foreign Ministers meet very frequently, but for many years we have discussed with France whether it is permissible also to discuss political issues. My theory is that NATO will only do justice to its responsibilities if it keeps its focus on the concept of networked security. I think that is happening to some extent. For none of these numerous conflicts can be resolved by military means alone.
 
Tensions, of course, run high in connection with what the answers should look like. What are the answers with regard to Ukraine? As far as the Minsk agreements are concerned, we are united. My heartfelt request is that implementation of sanctions against Russia be properly coordinated again if the situation escalates further – soldiers are now in the Kerch Strait. We won’t achieve anything if everyone implements their own sanctions. The third point is that we continue to support the NATO-Russia Founding Act. Communication channels need to remain open.
 
Then there is a fourth point: economic cooperation. There is already a wide range of discussions taking place on this issue – take the example of Nord Stream 2. I can understand Petro Poroshenko, who is sitting here and saying: Ukraine is a transit country for Russian natural gas, and wishes to remain so. I have assured him time and again that we will give him every possible support and conduct negotiations on this issue, and we will continue to do that, the election campaign notwithstanding. A Russian gas molecule is a Russian gas molecule, whether it comes via Ukraine or via the Baltic Sea. That means that the question of how dependent we are on Russian gas cannot be resolved by asking which pipeline it flows through. There, too, I say: I am ready. Nobody wants to become totally and unilaterally dependent on Russia. But if we even imported Russian gas during the Cold War – I was still in the GDR then and we consumed Russian gas there anyway, but the former Federal Republic then started importing large amounts of Russian gas – then I don’t know why the situation today should be so much worse that we can’t say that Russia remains a partner.
 
Let me ask you – again, it isn’t easy to say this in the presence of President Poroshenko on the left from where I’m standing and the Chinese representative on the right: Do we want to make Russia dependent on China or rely on China to import its natural gas? Is that in our European interests? No, I don’t think so, either. We also want to be involved in trade relations. That, too, is something we need to discuss frankly.
 
Although there is already very high LNG capacity in Europe – basically we have many more LNG terminals than we have LNG gas – we have made the strategic decision to continue to invest in LNG in Germany, too, in view of the predicted increase in gas consumption and LNG production particularly also in the United States of America. As we are phasing out nuclear energy as well as lignite and black coal, Germany will be a very safe market as far as natural gas is concerned, regardless of who is selling it.
 
Then we have the issue of Iran, which is currently a source of contention. We need to be very careful with regard to this division, which concerns me greatly. In a speech to the Knesset, I expressed my assurance that Israel’s right to exist is a fundamental guiding principle of Germany. And I mean exactly what I said. I am observing the ballistic missile programme, I am observing Iran in Yemen and above all I am observing Iran in Syria. The only question that divides us, the United States and the Europeans, on this issue, is: Does it serve our common cause, our common goal of reducing the harmful and difficult influence of Iran by terminating the only agreement still in force, or would we help our cause more by keeping hold of the small anchor we have in order to perhaps be able to exert pressure in other areas? That is the tactical issue over which we do not see eye to eye. But our goals are, of course, the same.
 
But I’ll also ask, as I am on the receiving end of criticism every day myself: Is it good for the Americans to want to pull out of Syria immediately and quickly, or is that not also a way to strengthen the opportunities for Iran and Russia to gain influence there? We need to talk about that, too. Those are issues that are on the table and that we need to discuss.
 
There is, of course, also the question of how economic relations between China, the United States and Europe should develop. That is a huge problem. We are observing that China is an up and coming country. When I visit China, its representatives say: for 1700 of the two thousand years A.D., we were the leading economy. Don’t get upset, all that’s going to happen is that we will return to the place where we always were. It’s just that you haven’t experienced it in the past 300 years. And we say: in the past 300 years we were the leaders, first the Europeans, then the United States, and then all of us together. Now, however, we need to deal with the situation as it is and find sensible solutions so that it doesn’t descend into a struggle that weakens all sides.
 
In this context I want to say quite clearly that I support all efforts to promote fairness and trade. I am talking about reciprocity. We need to talk about that. We need to do so in a spirit of partnership and in view of the fact that we have so many other problems to resolve in the world that it would be helpful if we could reach an understanding. I place great hope in the negotiations that are now being conducted with the United States of America in the area of trade.
 
I will say quite frankly that if we are serious about the transatlantic partnership, for me as German Chancellor it is a little disturbing to say the least to read that apparently – I haven’t yet seen it in writing – the US Department of Commerce has said that European cars are a threat to the national security of the United States of America. You see, we are proud of our cars, and we are entitled to be so. These vehicles are also built in the United States. The largest BMW factory is in South Carolina, not in Bavaria, in South Carolina. South Carolina in turn exports to China. If these vehicles, which are no less of a threat by being built in South Carolina than they would be by being built in Bavaria, suddenly pose a threat to US national security, then this comes as a shock to us. In that case, I can only say that I think it would be good for us to engage in proper talks. Whenever anyone has a grievance, we need to talk about it – that is how things work in the world. And then we will be able to find solutions.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, all these issues that are coming at us like puzzle pieces and which are too many for me to refer to here, are ultimately the expression of a fundamental question. Because we are noticing how great the pressure is on our traditional and, to us, familiar order, this raises the question of whether we are going to break up into a lot of individual puzzle pieces and think that each of us can best solve the problem single-handedly. As German Chancellor, I can only respond: if so, our chances are poor. For the United States of America has so much more economic clout and the dollar as a currency is so much stronger, that I can only say: obviously it holds the better hand. China, with more than 1.3 billion people, is so much larger. We can be as hard-working, as impressive, as super as we like – but with a population of 80 million we won’t be able to keep up if China decides that it no longer wants to maintain good relations with Germany. That’s how it will be all over the world.
 
So the one big question is this: Are we going to stay with the principle of multilateralism, which was the lesson we learned from the Second World War and the National Socialism caused by Germany, even when multilateralism is not always fun, but often difficult, slow, complicated? I am firmly convinced that it is better to put ourselves in one another’s shoes, to look beyond our own interests and to see whether we can achieve win-win solutions together rather than to think we can solve everything ourselves.
 
That is why, ladies and gentlemen, I was so pleased yesterday evening when I was preparing my speech and read a quotation by Lindsey Graham, who declared yesterday evening: “Multilateralism may be complicated, but it’s better than staying at home alone.” I think that is the right response to the motto of this conference “The Great Puzzle: Who Will Pick Up the Pieces?”: Only all of us together.
 
Thank you very much.
 
President Apostolos Tzitzikostas,
Members of the European Committee of the Regions,
Ladies and gentlemen,
Greetings to all of you in Brussels as well as in the regions and cities.
Germany is holding the Presidency of the Council of the EU in the second half of this year. We can state that this is a Council Presidency that is taking place in an exceptional situation. The COVID-19 pandemic is making us face challenges at all levels – in Europe, in the member states, in the regions and in the municipalities. Allow me to be very candid when I say that I’m observing the number of infections, which are rising once again in almost all parts of Europe, with great concern. Many people have lost their lives. So I must say that the situation continues to be very serious.
We must not forfeit what we have achieved thanks to restrictions in recent months. None of us found these restrictions easy. It’s therefore all the more important to ensure that another lockdown won’t be necessary and to avoid our healthcare systems reaching their limit once again. We must show that we have learned our lesson. And we must ask people in Europe to be careful, to abide by the rules, keep their distance, wear face masks and to do what we can in order to contain the spread of the virus and safeguard our economic activities nonetheless.
As elected officials, you are aware of the challenges in your regions – in hospitals and care homes, in schools and kindergartens, in companies and also in public places. Many of you are likewise aware of the challenge that these infection control measures can pose to a Europe without borders – for people who commute to a neighbouring country for work, for the cross-border cooperation of authorities and for relations between our societies.
Ladies and gentlemen, your perspectives on Europe, your experiences and commitment are what Europe needs in order to get through this difficult time in a spirit of solidarity and to assume responsibility in your regions. Without you, we can have only a limited impact as Heads of State and Government – and we can have just as limited an impact without the citizens of Europe. This is why I want to thank all those who assume responsibility in the municipalities and regions.
Crisis management is a herculean task that we can accomplish all the better if we in Europe all pull in the same direction. It was therefore extremely important to put together a comprehensive package in order to contain the economic and social impact of the pandemic. This is what both European credit and funding programmes as well as the decisions of the European Council on the multiannual financial framework and the recovery instrument with a total volume of 1.8 trillion euro aim to achieve. We believe – and I’m also fully convinced of this myself – that such an exceptional situation also calls for exceptional measures.
But now it is also vital to get this package under way so that the funds can actually be deployed from the beginning of 2021. We are working flat out to achieve an agreement with the European Parliament in this context. Moreover, we need to ratify the Own Resources Decision in each and every member state, i.e. for the funds from the Recovery Fund. Allow me to request also your support for this in the regions.
This isn’t just a question of short-term crisis management, but is also about preparing for the future – this is about Europe’s capacity to tap into new economic opportunities, thereby becoming less crisis-prone and creating more jobs. We must, to this end, make progress also with regard to major tasks such as climate protection and the digital transformation. Both of these are priorities of Germany’s Presidency of the Council of the European Union.
Europe’s competitiveness will increasingly depend on the extent to which we manage to achieve greater digital sovereignty and to strengthen our single market also in this regard. The single market is the essential foundation for Europe’s economic success and for each and every member state. But, as former Commission President Jacques Delors once pointed out, “nobody can fall in love with the single market”. This is why people must always be at the centre of all discussions on the digital transformation as well as the further development of the internal market. It is precisely this that sets our European economic and social model apart, namely the fact that we think of economic and social affairs as being two sides of the same coin. But not everyone around the world shares our way of living and working, of course. And that’s why we Europeans must tread our own path with confidence also with respect to the digital transformation in particular.
Climate protection is a similar story. I told the European Parliament in July and I wish to reiterate this once again here that I believe that a global solution to climate change will be successful above all if Europe plays a pioneering role. We will address Europe’s climate change goals at the European Council in two days’ time. On behalf of the German Government, I can say that we support the Commission’s proposal to reduce emissions by at least 55 percent compared with 1990 levels by 2030. Moreover, we’re working to achieve agreement in the Council regarding a European Climate Law – before the year is out, if possible.
We want to make progress also in European asylum and migration policy during Germany’s Presidency of the Council of the European Union. It’s clear that we Europeans must do more to live up to our humanitarian ideals, also with Moria in mind. A common migration policy is therefore vitally important. The fact that we haven’t been able to find a common way forward on this to date is a heavy burden for Europe. I therefore consider the Commission's proposal for a new pact on asylum and migration to be worth discussing. The ability to compromise is called for against the backdrop of different interests. Each member state will have to do its part to achieve a fair solution.
This period will also witness an important decision regarding our future relationship with the UK. Wide-ranging relations, and not least also countless city twinning partnerships show that an agreement is in everyone’s interests. The EU is united in its efforts to achieve this in the short time remaining. But we must also prepare ourselves for the eventuality that no agreement will be reached.
While these and other challenges are so very diverse, they have one thing in common, ladies and gentlemen. In order to overcome them, we need a strong Europe – a Europe with institutions that cooperate well, and a Europe with member states whose strength emerges precisely from decentralised structures, which do justice to the different situations in the regions, cities and municipalities.
Subsidiarity in action and European achievements such as freedom of movement and the freedoms of the internal market and the Schengen area stand us in good stead also in terms of coping with the pandemic. We need only think of the admission of patients from other EU countries or the supply of critical goods such as protective equipment and medicines.
However, we have witnessed that European cooperation also has its limits. I also say this with a measure of self-criticism. Looking back, we must admit that we concentrated too much on fighting the outbreak in our own countries, particularly at the beginning of the pandemic. But this experience teaches us once again that we need each other. We need close European cooperation in order to overcome major challenges. This can only be achieved together with members of the public and not over their heads.
The Conference on the Future of Europe will offer an excellent opportunity for us to discuss how we want to shape Europe together. We want – if the pandemic allows us to do so – to get the conference under way still during Germany's Presidency of the Council of the European Union, thereby lending weight to our motto: “Together for Europe’s recovery.”
Thank you very much. I’m now looking forward to hearing your contributions.
President of the European Parliament Antonio Tajani,
President of the European Commission Jean-Claude Juncker,
Members of Parliament,
Commissioners,
Ladies and gentlemen,
 
Nearly 50 years ago, Walter Hallstein, the former German Commission President, referred to European integration as an “endeavour of unparalleled boldness”. The year was 1969, ten years before the first direct European elections took place. At the time, the European Community was still in its infancy. Many of our greatest accomplishments – Schengen, the single market and a single currency – were still mere visions. But the foundation had been laid. And with that, after centuries marked by wars and dictatorships, the citizens of Europe for the first time held out hope for a sustainable, peaceful and stable future.
 
Today, I am pleased and grateful to be standing in front of the largest democratic parliament in the world. Together, you – 751 Members, elected in 28 member states – represent more than 500 million people. That is nearly seven percent of the world’s population. In your House, we can feel the heart of European democracy beating. The debates, which are held in 24 languages, are a sign of this. Your House also stands for another aspect of Europe, namely diversity. It is one of our great strengths as Europeans that we – time and again, and despite our diversity – have allowed ourselves to be guided by a willingness to compromise. Despite our different origins and opinions, we have so far always managed to arrive at solutions that benefit the community as a whole.
 
More than eleven years have passed since I first addressed this House. At the time, in 2007, Germany had assumed the Presidency of the Council of the European Union. In that speech, I spoke about diversity as a unifying, rather than dividing, factor, about freedom that constantly needs to be defended anew, and about Europe needing freedom the same way that people need air to breathe. I also talked about a fundamental value that characterises Europe – a value that brings freedom and diversity together in Europe. I spoke about tolerance. I spoke about how tolerance is the soul of Europe, about how it is an essential, fundamental value that defines European idea.
 
Over the past eleven years, we have also seen how much the world has changed – how, if you will, Europe’s soul has been put to the test. Global political, economic and technological challenges are developing at an ever greater pace, and they are becoming more and more profound. We have lived through a great public debt crisis. The European Union has not been spared the scourge of international terrorism. Wars and armed conflict are taking place only a few hours by plane beyond our doorstep. Global refugee and migration flows are also having a direct impact on us Europeans. The advance of digital technology is changing our way of life at breakneck speed. We are feeling the effects of climate change. Old allies are calling tried and proven alliances into question. The United Kingdom will be the first country to exit the European Union. These days are marked by intensive negotiations, and we more than ever are getting a sense of how deep that impact will be. – I want to express my heartfelt thanks to Michel Barnier for his work.
 
Members of this esteemed House – why am I saying this? We all realise that predicting developments has become more difficult. But we also realise something else. The likelihood that interests can be asserted at global level by a single actor is steadily decreasing. Vice versa, this means it is becoming ever more important for us Europeans to take a united stance. For this, everyone in the European Union must now more than ever show respect for others and their interests. We must now more than ever have a common understanding that tolerance is the soul of Europe, that it is a key part of what makes us European, and that only through tolerance can we develop a willingness to consider, and fully identify with, the needs and interests of others. This will help us forge true European solidarity, without which successful action is impossible. This solidarity is built on tolerance. It is the basis of our strength as Europeans. A strength that is unique in the world, for three reasons:
Firstly, solidarity is a universal value. Standing up for one another is an essential prerequisite for every functioning society. This holds true for families, villages and sports associations, as it does for a community such as the European Union. Solidarity is a fundamental component of the European treaties. It is an indispensable part of our system of values. Solidarity is encoded in our European DNA. We support countries and regions, by promoting their economic development or assisting efforts to combat youth unemployment. We help one another when natural disasters strike. When terrorist attacks or nuclear accidents occur, we stand by one another. During the European public debt crisis, we put together so-called rescue packages to help countries solve their economic and financial problems.
 
These few examples already show that the individual EU member states, and thereby also the citizens of the European Union, are not left in the lurch during tough times and crises. However, these few examples also show that national decisions always also have an effect on the entire community.
 
Therefore, secondly, solidarity always means that everyone must bear responsibility for the community as a whole. Specifically, this means anyone who undermines rule-of-law principles in their own country, or who curtails rights of the opposition and civil society and restricts the freedom of the press, thereby jeopardises the rule of law not only in his or her own country, but for everyone in Europe. Europe as a community of law can of course only function when the law applies – and is respected – equally everywhere.
 
Anyone who seeks to solve problems only by taking on new debt, or who ignores binding obligations, also calls into question the foundation of a strong and stable euro area. That is because our single currency can only function if every single member meets national obligations for sustainable finances. Anyone who undermines a unified European stance when interacting with third parties – regarding, for example, agreed sanctions or questions related to human rights – also undermines the credibility of European foreign policy as a whole. Because Europe will only make its voice heard in the world if it stands united. This means that showing solidarity always requires overcoming national egotisms.
 
I am well aware that Germany has not always behaved well, and that at times others take issue with its behaviour. For example, in the years before 2015, it took us far too long, also in Germany, to accept that the refugee issue concerns all EU member states, and that it must be dealt with through a pan-European approach.
 
From this it follows, thirdly, that solidarity that benefits all, also ultimately and rightly understood, means solidarity that is in everyone’s own best interest. Respecting and supporting others, on the one hand, and pursuing one’s own interests, on the other hand, are not contradictory. Quite the opposite is true. One example is our cooperation with African countries of origin in the sphere of refugees and migration. – The President addressed this just a moment ago. – This cooperation helps Europe, because it establishes more orderly, controlled and reduced movements of refugees and migrants to Europe. At the same time, it helps people in the countries of origin by improving their living conditions. We can also prevent them from embarking on what is often a perilous journey to Europe.
 
Another example is Europe’s commitment to worldwide climate protection. These efforts are an ecological and social necessity for protecting the resources on which life depends – also for everyone here in Europe. Europe benefits when industrialised and newly industrialising countries produce less greenhouse gasses, and when all of our economies become greener.
 
What is more, all Europeans benefit when the euro area, too, develops harmoniously, becoming a haven of strength and stability. All Europeans benefit when everyone joins in European civil protection efforts. All Europeans benefit when we help those who are most severely affected by displacement and migration. It is a matter of tolerance that we respect the different reactions in the various member states when it comes to the question of taking in refugees – because each member state has its own history and demographic development. However, it is a matter of solidarity that we do everything in our power to find a common approach for tackling this and other challenges as a community.
 
These are hallmarks of Europe: solidarity as a universal, fundamental value; solidarity as a responsibility for the community; and solidarity in terms of one’s own rational interest.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, unity and common resolve are essential if Europe is to succeed. I therefore want to highlight three spheres that I think should be at the top of our agenda.
 
Firstly, there is our foreign and security policy. We already now realise that we Europeans are much better able to defend our interests whenever we act in concert. Only by taking a united stance will Europe be strong enough to make its voice heard in the global arena and defend its values and interests. It’s simply true that the times when we could fully rely on others have ended. This means nothing other than that, if we Europeans want to survive as a community, we must make a greater effort to take our destiny into our own hands. This means that, in the long term, Europe must become more capable of taking foreign policy action. We must therefore be ready to rethink our decision-making processes, also by lifting the unanimity requirement wherever possible – that is, in areas where this is permitted by the treaties.
 
I have proposed that we establish a European Security Council with rotating member state membership, in which important decisions could be more swiftly prepared. We need to create a fully capable, European military force for rapid deployment to affected regions in times of crisis. We have made great progress on permanent structured cooperation in the military domain. That is a good thing, and these efforts have received wide support here.
 
Yet – and I say this very deliberately in view of the developments in recent years – we ought to work on the vision of one day establishing a proper European army. Yes, that’s how things stand. Four years ago, Jean-Claude Juncker said: a joint EU army would show the world that there would never again be a war between EU countries. That would not be an army in competition with NATO – don’t misunderstand me – but it could be an effective complement to NATO. Nobody wants to call traditional alliances into question. But, ladies and gentlemen, it would then be much easier to cooperate with us. When, as is the case at the moment, we have more than 160 defence or weapons systems and the United States has only 50 or 60, when each country needs its own administration, support and training for everything, we are not an efficient partner. If we want to use our financial resources efficiently and are pursuing many of the same objectives, nothing speaks against us being colllectively represented in NATO with a European army. I don’t see any contradiction there at all.
 
That would then also involve ... (heckling from the floor) – I welcome that response. That doesn’t bother me. I’m used to parliament. –
 
That, incidentally, would also involve the joint development of weapons systems within Europe. And it would also involve – this is a difficult task, also for the Federal Republic of Germany – developing a joint arms export policy, because otherwise we would not be able to present a united front in the world.
 
Secondly, ladies and gentlemen, Europe’s economic success is a crucial factor. It forms the basis of our strength and determines whether our voice will even be heard in the world. Without economic clout, we will have no political influence either. I am delighted that Jean-Claude Juncker’s programme, the Investment Plan for Europe, has had a significant impact in recent years and that we have already launched 340 or 350 billion euros of investments out of a total volume of 500 billion euros envisaged by 2020. That is a good programme to boost investment. I am aware of how often there have been calls for more investment, particularly from you in the European Parliament. That has now been set in motion. But we ought to discuss the issue again in due course. For, ladies and gentlemen, 340 billion euros is not peanuts, but a tangible contribution to greater prosperity in Europe.
 
It goes without saying that a stable and prosperous Europe also requires a stable economic and monetary union. We intend to continue to develop the European Stability Mechanism. We are working on the banking union. We are working on a eurozone budget, a concept proposed by Germany and France. In my opinion, that should be dovetailed very closely with the medium-term financial perspective. We are also advocating that liability and control go hand in hand. That means that a banking union and ultimately a European deposit guarantee system are dependent on the prior reduction of risks in the individual countries. The two are interconnected. European solidarity and individual responsibility are always two sides of the same coin. As the European Council – Germany and France at least are certainly working to achieve this – we will have tangible results to show by December.
 
We will also make progress on one issue that is currently being discussed in great depth and in which you, too are heavily involved – digital taxation. The question for Germany is not whether we have to implement digital taxation – that goes without saying in the digital age – our question is how to proceed. I think it is one of the rules of good democratic behaviour that we take note of the Commission’s proposals but can also supplement them. We believe that the best option in an international context would be to find an international solution. We advocate minimal taxation. But if that doesn’t work, we can’t afford to wait until doomsday, but should take a Europe-wide approach. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is what Germany is working to achieve.
 
If we are honest, when we look to the future and stop to think about our prosperity, we have to accept that the major innovations now no longer always or usually come from Europe, as was the case 100 years ago and 130 years ago. Today, a large proportion of ground-breaking innovations come from Asia and from the United States. That of course begs the question: Will we dictate the form of the mobility of the future on the continent which once invented the car? It bothers me, for example, that we aren’t able to manufacture battery cells. The fact that Chinese enterprises are now investing in Germany is okay. But I think we ought to make a great effort to ensure that in Europe we are also in a position to master a drive technology of the future and to make the production of battery cells possible here, too. We have the European instruments to achieve this. We have all that at our disposal – as we already do with chips today.
 
We need to be among the leaders in quantum computers. We need to develop a joint strategy for artificial intelligence. All this is still possible, because we have a strong industrial basis in Europe. We can build on this, and we now need to make use of it. Research and innovation are therefore central factors in our future prosperity.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, the third issue I want to raise is the topic of refugees and migration. During the euro crisis, we had many obstacles to overcome in order to reach a joint solution, but we succeeded. But on the issue of refugees and migration, Europe is not yet as united as I would like. As this is a central issue which concerns relations with our neighbourhood, we need to find common approaches here.
 
We have indeed made progress. We all agree that we need common European border management. With hindsight I will say that it was no doubt somewhat careless to create a Schengen area of free movement but only now to work on compiling entry and exit records in order to confirm who is in our country and who is leaving. Nonetheless, it is right that we are doing so now. It is right that we are developing Frontex. In my view, the Commission proposals are good. Here, too, the important point is this: If every country wants to retain its national competence and nobody wants to hand over any responsibility to the European border guards, no matter how extensive and how competent they are, they will not be able to do their job. In this area, too, we need to forego our national competences to some degree and work together.
 
We also need to consider how we can best share the workload with regard to development assistance, development cooperation and economic development in Africa. We are now seeing outstanding results – that wouldn’t have been possible two or three years ago – when individual member states work in cooperation with the Commission in specific African countries and thereby achieve so much more than if we all headed off there to do our own thing. Yet we have a great deal more to learn in this area. Nonetheless, I believe we are moving in the right direction.
 
Another priority needs to be for us to develop a common European asylum procedure. If every country makes decisions based on different criteria, the people affected are aware of this and then it is no wonder that secondary movement takes place within the Schengen area. It is vital that just as we are developing a common level playing field for the internal market, we make the effort to develop common standards also on such sensitive issues as asylum law and humanitarian responsibility. Otherwise we will not be able to handle the task with which refugees and migration confront us.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, those were just three examples of many. The protests show that I have hit the mark. That is good, and I am honoured. I believe that people want Europe to tackle the very issues that are uppermost in their minds. People want a Europe that provides answers to their burning questions. That doesn’t mean that Europe has to have a finger in every pie, as it were. It is still the case that not every problem in Europe is a problem for Europe. Solidarity does not mean omnipresence. But solidarity does mean that Europe engages itself where it is needed and that it is then able to act firmly, decisively and effectively.
 
I am convinced that Europe is our best chance for lasting peace, lasting prosperity and a secure future. Our gathering in Paris at the invitation of the French President to remember the brutalities of the First World War 100 years ago ought to have reminded us once again what happens when nations have no respect for one another and what happens when alliances such as the League of Nations, which was founded in the wake of the First World War, fail. Even greater horrors followed. This is why we cannot afford to squander this European opportunity. We owe that to ourselves, we owe it to generations past, and we owe it to future generations. That means that nationalism and egoism must never again be allowed to gain a foothold in Europe. Rather, tolerance and solidarity are our common future. Ladies and gentlemen, that is something absolutely worth striving for.
 
Thank you very much.
Nuncio, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen,
I am delighted to be able to offer all of you a warm welcome to Schloss Meseberg.
When we met here last year, I talked about the fact that we are living through turbulent times. Little has changed in this respect to this day – we need only to think of the many conflicts right now, of the abandonment of agreements in the field of arms control and non-proliferation or of the conflicts in foreign trade. These examples also show how quickly trust, which has often been painstakingly built up over many years, can be lost again.
That is why I would like to address you personally, Excellencies, because you play a key role here. You are ambassadors, mediators, advocates and representatives all at once. You promote dialogue in a wide range of ways and you give the countries you hail from a face here in Germany, while at the same time painting a picture of Germany at home. You therefore have a decisive impact on the political as well as the societal relations between our countries.
The willingness and ability to engage in constructive dialogue is an invaluable asset in itself. I think the history of the 20th century has made this fact abundantly clear to us.
After the end of the Second World War and the betrayal of all civilised values that was the Shoa, with which Germany, my country, had brought infinite suffering to Europe and the world, far-sighted women and men set about creating a peaceful order. Germany was able to find a new, firm place in the international community. Wartime adversaries became allies, partners and friends. All of this would have been unthinkable without trust and without the foundations of democracy, freedom and the rule of law. The fall of the Berlin Wall 30 years ago, which paved the way for German unity, would likewise never have been conceivable without the trust that was extended towards Germany, trust built up through constant dialogue.
The same is true for today’s challenges. But with dialogue and trust, everything is possible.
We need only think of the solution to the name dispute between North Macedonia and Greece, which is a recent example of how solutions can suddenly be found even in conflicts that have been deadlocked for decades. This required persistent mediation from the UN, support from the EU and, in particular, the trust that Macedonian Prime Minister Zoran Zaev and Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, who was in office until yesterday, were willing to place in each other.
Building mutual trust therefore enables progress in the respective national interest and in the European or indeed global interest.
This mindset also guides Franco-German cooperation. In the Treaty of Aachen, which we signed in January of this year, we gave expression to our shared ideas for the further development of Europe. In the Normandy format, Germany and France are continuing their mediation efforts to resolve the conflict in eastern Ukraine. It is worth every effort to alleviate the suffering of the civilian population on the ground and to enforce international law based on the principle of the sovereign equality of states. Moreover, for the first time in the history of the UN Security Council, there was a joint presidency held by Germany and France. During the two months of this joint presidency, a resolution on preventing and responding to sexual violence in conflict was adopted. The cooperation in a spirit of trust between a number of countries has also made it possible to prosecute criminals internationally more effectively from now on.
Trust and a broad willingness to cooperate are also required when it comes to, at long last, creating lasting peace and stability in Afghanistan. Thanks to the efforts of the US and the Afghan Government, the work towards achieving a political settlement in Afghanistan is gradually beginning to take shape. I hope that the intra-Afghan meeting on Sunday, initiated by Germany and Qatar, will inject further movement into the peace process.
There are, unfortunately, far too many examples of how long and difficult it is to build trust and peace
The international community has witnessed the terrible war in Syria for eight years now. We still firmly believe that only a political process based on UN Security Council Resolution 2254 and under the auspices of the UN can end the bloodshed in Syria, build confidence, initiate national reconciliation and allow the Syrian people – both in the region and including Syrians who have fled to other countries – to decide the political future of their country for themselves in free elections. Together with the UN and our international partners, the Federal Government will continue to work to advance the political process. But I regret to say that we’re moving at a glacial pace.
We also need urgent progress in Yemen in view of the catastrophic humanitarian situation in the region. It is important to support the work of the UN Special Envoy for Yemen in particular
The situation in the Sudan also fills us with concern and the country stands at a crossroads. The formation of a transitional government will hopefully open the door to a peaceful path of democracy and economic development. This is mainly thanks to the mediation efforts of the African Union and Ethiopia. Thank you so very much for this.
We are also following the situation in Libya with great concern. The terrible developments that go hand in hand with the ongoing conflict were recently demonstrated by the terrible attack on a camp of African refugees and migrants, which claimed many lives and injured a great number of people. As a member of the UN Security Council, Germany chairs the Sanctions Committee on Libya. Germany supports the UN’s efforts to achieve an unconditional ceasefire and to return to a political process. I can only say that this is urgently needed in light of the current situation. Far too many weapons reach Libya with the help of external actors. The arms embargo must therefore be implemented in order to prevent further escalation. We must make every effort to ensure that there is no development of the kind that we have seen in Syria for years.
The fragile situation in Libya also has knock-on effects with respect to the security situation in the Sahel region. In May, I visited Mali, where the Bundeswehr is participating in the UN stabilisation mission MINUSMA, as well as the Niger and Burkina Faso. In the discussions held there, the Presidents were unanimous in their view that international terrorism can only be pushed back by joining forces. Unfortunately, the security situation in this region is deteriorating dramatically in certain quarters at the moment.
It goes without saying that progress with respect to the security and stability of the region also depends on the G5 countries’ own efforts. Nevertheless, international partners can and should lend their support in this regard. By joining forces, it is possible to achieve greater stability and therefore improved development prospects in the Sahel region. The preamble to the 2030 Agenda of the UN rightly points out that “there can be no sustainable development without peace and no peace without sustainable development.” Indeed, security is a fundamental prerequisite for economic prosperity, which, in turn, helps to prevent radicalisation. Security policy and civilian engagement are therefore two sides of the same coin.
From a European perspective, it is particularly important to support our neighbouring continent Africa’s ownership of its security and development. The Federal Government is working on this issue in a variety of ways.
Africa as a whole is not only rich in natural resources, but is, first and foremost, an innovative continent because it is home to so many young people – a continent with great economic potential; and we must make better use of this potential. The envisaged African Continental Free Trade Area, which was agreed at the Conference of the African Union in the Niger, may be the key to this. However, we have also seen that economic growth is not keeping pace with population growth in a number of regions of Africa and that there continues to be too much povert
At the same time, some African countries are becoming increasingly attractive economic partners for Germany and Europe. This applies in particular to the countries of the Compact with Africa initiative, which we launched in 2017 during Germany’s G20 Presidency. The fact that foreign direct investment has risen significantly in these countries in recent years goes to show how important the Compact with Africa is.
I will therefore meet the heads of state and government of the CwA countries in Berlin once again this year. I would like to encourage them to continue down the growth-friendly reform path that they have embarked on. Above all, however, we want to promote economic development with very concrete investment offers. We also want to hold earnest discussions about how we can better support each other. German businesses should invest even more in Africa – and this is something that we are working on. An investors’ conference will therefore be held at the same time as this conference.
This commitment is part of the overall picture of a partnership based on mutual trust – and on the fact that Africans themselves know best what is necessary and right for the development of their continent. It was with this in mind that the Federal Government updated its Africa Policy Guidelines in order to strengthen our partnerships. To this end, we are focusing on topics such as the digital transformation and innovation, education and training – which are absolutely fundamental – as well as on employment, trade and investment.
The G20 Summits likewise focus on the major issues of the future. Their results are not always entirely convincing, however. At the last G20 Summit in Osaka, for example, we again achieved only a 19:1 result on climate protection and only a minimum consensus on trade and migration issues. Nevertheless, I would like to thank the Japanese Presidency most sincerely for its tireless efforts.
On the issue of artificial intelligence, common principles for the responsible development and use of this technology were adopted at any rate. In Osaka, the G20 also reaffirmed its commitment to reforming the WTO. The main issues here are comparable conditions of competition, greater transparency and effective dispute settlement mechanisms.
The common rules of the WTO trading system are of paramount importance for our economies, which are linked by international value chains. After all, the decisions and economic developments of some always have an impact on the economies of others. We feel this most keenly. This is why a multilateral approach to trade policy is and remains the best of all pathways for the global economy as a whole.
In the spirit of rules-based, fair and free trade, Germany also supports the EU in its efforts to conclude bilateral and regional trade agreements. An agreement was recently reached with the Mercosur states to create the world’s largest free trade area with 780 million inhabitants. I firmly believe that companies, employees and consumers in Europe and South America will benefit from this in equal measure. The fact that the agreement between the EU and Mercosur also contains a commitment to the Paris Climate Agreement shows that we have much more in common than just economic relations.
Ultimately, we can only master the great challenges of humanity together. In view of all the global challenges – climate change, poverty, hunger, disease, access to education, the digital revolution – we cannot emphasise often enough the fact that the national good in our highly interconnected world always depends on the global common good. More than ever, our way of thinking and our actions have to be multilateral rather than unilateral, outward-looking rather than isolationist, global rather than national, and together rather than alone.
There are so many good examples that show what trust between states can achieve and how important and necessary international cooperation is.
A noteworthy example of this is the Treaty on Open Skies. Within the framework of this Treaty, 34 States Parties from Vancouver to Vladivostok share an observation aircraft that each State Party may use each year to conduct a certain number of agreed observation flights in the airspace of other States Parties. These flights use sensors for photo, radar and infrared recording as well as digital sensors. Germany made a new aircraft available for this purpose in June of this year. Individuals from both the observing and observed parties are involved in the conduct of all observation flights. The country being overflown has its own military personnel on board. The Treaty thus not only ensures trust and cooperative security, but also makes a tangible contribution to conflict prevention and crisis management.
Ladies and gentlemen, the famous German natural scientist Alexander von Humboldt, whose 250th birthday we are marking this year, firmly believed that everything was interaction. He was also of the opinion that “the most dangerous world view is the world view of those who have never viewed the world”. You, on the other hand, who work in the diplomatic service, view the world. You build contacts. You explain points of view and mediate between points of view. You help to build and consolidate the trust that is essential for good cooperation.
I’m grateful that you are available to us as points of contact. I also say this on behalf of the entire Federal Government, of which many members are here today: the Head of the Federal Chancellery, the Minister of State from the Foreign Office, the Minister of State from the Federal Chancellery, the Parliamentary State Secretary from the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development and another Parliamentary State Secretary, and so on and so forth; we’re just trying to outdo each other here. When the Minister is out and about, then the Parliamentary State Secretaries can also indulge in a spot of travelling, which is nice. It goes without saying that Directors-General from the Federal Chancellery and various ministries are also here. All of us are looking forward to continuing our work with you. Thank you – and a warm welcome to you once again.
Federal Minister Giffey,
Minister-President,
Former Women’s and Family Ministers,
Parliamentary State Secretaries,
State Secretaries,
Mayors,
Ladies and gentlemen,
 
When Marie Juchacz, about whom we have already heard today, became the first woman to give a speech in the National Assembly in February 1919, she began by saying “Gentlemen and ladies”. Merely addressing the audience in this way caused amusement. As we have heard, it took great courage for women to win their place in politics because even as late as 1902 – when women already had the vote in New Zealand – the Prussian Minister of the Interior said that women had no business in politics.
 
At the turn of the century, women all around the world began fighting for their own rights. They forged links with other women and supported each other. And it must be said that this was an arduous, exhausting, but ultimately successful battle. On 12 November 1918, 100 years ago today, women finally arrived in German politics. This was a shining moment in the history of democracy.
 
I will never forget the time I spoke with the former King of Saudi Arabia – he is now deceased – about the issue of equal rights in his country. His first reaction was to ask me since when women had actually been allowed to vote in Germany. And when I said that they had got the vote less than 100 years ago, he looked at me with great sympathy and said that it had taken us a very, very long time. And he was right.
 
That is why I am pleased about the many anniversary events that are now taking place. And I am happy that we are paying tribute to women such as Marie Juchacz and Hedwig Dohm, who truly demonstrated great courage. We know that looking at history often gives us the strength to shape the future. That is why it is very, very important to look at the past. After all, not only did these women fight for the rights of a group or particular clientèle – they fought for a human right. The struggle was for equality between all people – and that remains the case today. A society can only be just if it puts equality between women and men into everyday practice. That is why it is truly fitting for us to pay humble tribute to our female activists for women’s suffrage. They were very courageous and had to stand firm until they achieved a breakthrough. It is thus a very great honour indeed for me to give the speech on the centenary of women’s suffrage as Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany. After all, the right to vote was merely a start, although naturally it was very significant.
 
It often took and takes a long time – too long – to make progress on equal opportunities, equal status and equal treatment. Looking back, it seems incredible that until 1977 a woman still had to ask her husband’s permission if she wanted to work. And marital rape has only been a crime since 1997.
 
Ideas have changed significantly in society in recent decades. Role models such as you, Ms Peschel-Gutzeit, Rita Süssmuth, Ms Lehr and Ms Bergmann, who are all here with us today, made great progress. These days, no one ridicules a young girl when she says she would like to be a minister or even federal chancellor when she grows up. I have even heard that some people ask if a man can become federal chancellor – no, I’m not making that up!
 
At the end of 2017, over 71 percent of women in Germany were employed – 12 percent more than in 2005. Parental leave, parental allowance and the statutory entitlement to childcare make it easier for mothers to return to work. And as I already mentioned, regulations have also been adopted for men because equal opportunities for women and men can only exist in the first place if both change their roles.
 
But we still have a lot to do. Equal pay is one of the big questions on the agenda. This involves two sorts of questions. One question concerns salaries in different professions and what it means if there are typical professions for women and men. And the other is that there are still – particularly in sectors without statutory wage agreements – hidden inequalities in pay. That is why I thought it was great when Ms Rehn said there was complete transparency in her company. That is very important.
 
Naturally, we still need to improve many things. We recently adopted a law aimed at providing better childcare. We want to invest a further 5.5 billion euros in the quality of childcare by 2022. We need very variable and flexible structures so that ideally we can give every woman and every man a real choice.
 
We can only achieve justice and fairness in our society by working as allies, not as opponents. Every woman in Germany should be able to go her own way – irrespective of whether or not she has children, is a single parent or in a relationship, or works full time or part time – and to return to work, Ms Peschel-Gutzeit is right, whether her job is as a mechanic, manager, teacher or nurse. Women and men should have the same opportunities to develop their talents.
 
Of course, we have achieved a lot since the time of Marie Juchacz, but we still have a great deal to do. The most important thing is that we do not accept any backsliding. And of course, politics plays a key role in this. That is why the German Bundestag is not a shining light in this legislative term. I just spoke about that. In the last legislative term, 36.5 percent of its members were women – now 30.9 percent are. That is almost exactly the same percentage as in the Sudanese parliament. I think we really cannot content ourselves with that. I do not only want to talk now about Rwanda, where 61 percent of the members of parliament are women, but above all to underline a structural aspect concerning the African Union Commission. African regions are represented in this Commission, in each case by a woman and a man. This automatically means parity in the Commission, and I think that is really a very good thing. We need to watch out so that our way of thinking in Europe, which can verge on arrogance at times, does not automatically lead us to believe that things may not be so good yet in other places. For example, women play a major role in Africa. And it is also important that we support them via development policy.
 
Now, we do not only need to look at the Bundestag – in some regional parliaments, only a quarter of the members are women, although women account for over half of the population. I think that the percentage of women in parliaments is a fundamental issue in our democracy. We will simply have to take new paths here, too. To be honest, I am still shocked about the number of female mayors – I wasn’t really so aware of it. It is also crucial that we look at this again. I am delighted that Ms Reker of Cologne is here with us today.
 
There are many signs that we also need to think about new ways for people to be politically active. We need formats that suit our century. And I am not so sure that men always welcome it either when all local party meetings take place on Saturday mornings. So it shouldn’t come as a surprise here either. When I think of the average age of the members of my party, naturally I look longingly at the Greens. In my party, the average age is over 60, while in the Greens it is 48.7. But even that is higher than the average age of the German population, which actually has one of the highest average ages in the world. Consequently, we need to attract young people and that means finding formats that work for them. These formats may then fit even somewhat better with those tailored to women.
 
In other words, everyone must have a chance to get involved. And there is no getting round it, the quotas were important, but the goal must be parity – parity everywhere, be it in politics, business, the administration, academia and indeed in the cultural sphere. We recently marked 20 years of the office of Federal Government Commissioner for Culture and the Media. If you look at the number of female conductors, renowned female painters and women in the arts, then you need to ask yourself what is going on because it cannot be that women are less talented. In this area, too, we need to specifically support women to help them achieve a breakthrough, become better known and make headway. This really goes for all sectors in society.
 
In the civil service, the coalition government has set a goal of achieving an equal number of women and men in all senior management positions by 2025. In some cases, we are still a long way from that, but we are aware of the role model function of the civil service. That is why I think it is good news that women now hold four of the eight positions of Director-General in the Federal Chancellery. I am rather proud of that.
 
As regards the business sector in Germany, much is still in a sorry state. In the United States, there are at least two women on the board of 90 percent of the largest publicly traded companies. In the UK and France, this figure is around 50 percent – but in Germany it is a mere 16.7 percent. This means that we are a long way from truly making use of skills and talents in the business sector, too. And we really should not and cannot afford to continue like this – also with a view to demographic change. It was the right approach – Ms Giffey reported on this – to also take a step as regards supervisory boards via the law on more women in management positions. In fact, no one still claims now that no women are available for such positions. We still have major problems in medium-sized enterprises. We need to keep working on that. And should a woman ever head up a DAX company, then that should not be something special, but rather the first step to normality. We need to keep repeating that.
 
My hope is that it will become standard for women and men to share employment, childcare and housework equally and that no one will be forced into a particular role or division of labour because of their sex. And I hope that this will not take a further 100 years, as equality between women and men is an important indicator of whether and to what extent a society is just. I think we are all certain that a society’s future viability depends on how just it is. And that is why this is equally in the hands of women and men or men and women.
 
Many thanks, and thank you for being here today.
Mr Ischinger, Heads of State and Government, Representatives, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen,
The Ukraine crisis, the terrorism of IS in Iraq and Syria, the Ebola epidemic – these three topics alone go to show that the past year brought with it a great deal of suffering and destruction for people at different ends of the earth. And it also brought troubling challenges for international security policy. That’s why it was right of you, Mr Ischinger, to place the question of the state of the international order at the heart of today, tomorrow and yesterday’s discussions.
In 2015 we’re commemorating some historical turning points.
Firstly, the Second World War and the Shoah, that utter betrayal of all civilised values, unleashed by Germany, came to an end exactly 70 years ago. After this horror, after decades and centuries of bloodshed, it became possible to create a new order for international relations, one which aimed to permanently secure the peaceful coexistence of peoples. The United Nations, the North Atlantic Alliance and the European Union are all key elements of this order.
Secondly, 40 years ago the CSCE Final Act was signed in Helsinki, with which the inviolability of frontiers, peaceful settlement of disputes and non-intervention in internal affairs of other states were recognised. That was an important milestone in the long journey of overcoming the Cold War.
Thirdly, exactly 25 years ago the Two plus Four Treaty was signed, completing the process of German reunification. These two events marked not only a turning point for German history but also a fresh start for relations between East and West. At this juncture I’d like to clearly reiterate that Germany remains forever grateful to the peoples of Central and Eastern Europe for courageously and honourably standing up for their freedom and independence, for this also paved the way for Germany to reunify in peace and freedom.
Ladies and gentlemen, for over a year now, the crisis in Ukraine has demonstrated that respect for the principles of Europe’s peaceful order can by no means be taken for granted. For Russia’s actions – first in Crimea and then in eastern Ukraine – have gone against these principles of our coexistence. Ukraine is seeing both its territorial integrity and sovereignty disregarded. International law is being violated.
After the terrible war in the Balkans in the 1990s, we are once again being forced to experience what it’s like when peace and stability in Europe are called into question and the use of force becomes a bitter reality.
Russia’s actions conflict with the commitments it has made, for instance in the CSCE Final Act or – above all – in the Budapest Memorandum, in which the United States of America, the United Kingdom and Russia had pledged to protect the territorial integrity of Ukraine, in return for which the country would renounce its nuclear armament.
Especially when thinking of certain discussions on the margins of this Security Conference, the question begs: what country would give up its nuclear capacity when we cannot ensure that territorial integrity is accepted? That is why, together with its transatlantic partners, the European Union is making it clear that a policy which aims to forcefully alter borders in Europe can have no place in the 21st century. We’re making it clear that international law must be respected. A new division in Europe is in none of our interests, and a confrontation which risks spiralling out of control certainly isn’t either.
We want to work with, not against Russia, in shaping security in Europe. That applies to the European as well as the transatlantic security architecture. And it also applies to our efforts to overcome common international challenges, from the spread of weapons of mass destruction to combating international terrorism. The E3+3 negotiations on reaching a solution to the nuclear conflict with Iran and the elimination of Syrian chemical weapons prove that, despite all crises, we can successfully cooperate with Russia on important topics.
As it happens, these examples also go to show that the international order can have a positive effect. However this does require that all participants are always willing to be clear as regards the fundamental principles of this, that they adhere to them and that they allow themselves to be assessed on how well they implement them. Indeed, Russia must contribute to this in the context of the Ukraine crisis. The crisis cannot be resolved by military means.
That’s why, now, it’s more important than ever to lay out concrete steps which translate the Minsk agreements into reality. Our discussions, including our current talks in Kyiv and Moscow, serve this goal, and I’m pleased that President Poroshenko is taking part in this conference. I have to say though that even after the talks held by the French President and myself in Moscow yesterday, it’s unclear whether they’ll succeed. Nevertheless, the French President and I agree that it’s worth giving it a try. I think that if nothing else we owe it to the people in Ukraine affected by the crisis.
Anyone who wants to ensure the long-term security, stability and well-being of their people must act as part of the international community and accept its rules. Together with our partners, we in Europe will always stand up for our values and our peaceful order.
This context must also serve as the backdrop of the decisions taken at the NATO Summit in Wales last year, with which NATO laid the foundations for better operational readiness of the Alliance’s response forces. We are thus refocusing the Alliance on collective defence, including with the potential threats of hybrid warfare in mind.
Our Eastern partners particularly count on this. Their security concerns are all of our concerns. Thus, in the coming twelve months, together with the Netherlands and Norway, Germany will serve as framework nation for NATO’s Very High Readiness Joint Task Force, which is still in the formation stage, and will make a significant contribution to its test exercises. In alliance with Denmark and Poland we’ll develop the multinational headquarters in Szczecin into a hub for future regional cooperation and defence of the Alliance. By doing so we are assuming direct responsibility for the security of our Alliance partners as well as that of our neighbours in Central and Eastern Europe.
It is precisely because NATO is a community of shared values that Article 5 implies more than statements of intent. Solidarity amongst Alliance partners is not just a utilitarian idea, it’s based on shared values and common convictions. That’s why we consider it to be so crucial for there to be a credible framework for it.
At the same time we must work on restoring and strengthening the instruments of cooperative security in Europe. The OSCE has a crucial role to play in this. Over the past year it has actively proven its value as a forum for dialogue and confidence-building in Europe. In order to get back to the path of confidence-building and cooperation, it is crucial that all participating States show their commitment to the principles of the OSCE – with both words and action.
We want to renew our shared understanding of the principles which state that security and cooperation can ultimately only be achieved in Europe by means of dialogue, cooperation and confidence-building. The pre-requisite for this, which I’d like to reiterate in no uncertain terms here, is that we uphold or reinstate, without reservation, the principles of our European post-war and peaceful order. They are as follows; firstly: Europe’s borders are and will remain unalterable. Secondly: the peoples of Europe are and will remain free to determine their own future. It took very long negotiations in the CSCE process to formulate these principles.
These convictions guide us when we work to ensure that in the states of the Balkans, too, democracy, freedom and self-determination can lead to stability, security and prosperity. Protectionism and isolation are failed recipes of the past. They don’t fit in in today’s era of free-trade agreements.
Thus on the German side we will work resolutely to secure the conclusion of a free-trade agreement with the United States of America. For we don’t want to sit back and watch whilst all of Asia concludes free-trade agreements one-by-one and Europe falls behind. Nevertheless, we have our work cut out.
The stance that protectionism and isolation belong in the past is expressed by the European Union and its transatlantic partners through the long-term cooperation projects which we launched at the conference on the Western Balkans, for example, or through our substantial support for the people of Ukraine.
We too are very interested in advancing towards our long-term goal of a common economic space from Vladivostok to Lisbon to Vancouver. I support the talks necessary for this, also between the EU Commission and the Eurasian Union. But let me add that a for such talks to even take place, and certainly for them to be successful, the Ukraine crisis must be resolved in accordance with international law.
Ladies and gentlemen, Europe’s southern neighbourhood is also causing us concern. It is characterised by turmoil, fragility and the collapse of states. Over the past four years, the civil war in Syria alone has claimed more than 220,000 victims. Countless civilians, women and children have fallen victim to the violence. Millions of people have fled their homes. The neighbouring countries, Lebanon, Turkey and Jordan deserve a great deal of gratitude from the international community, for by taking in refugees they are stretching their capacities to the limits and indeed beyond. In light of the people’s suffering, all our help naturally offers but little solace, at best. It’s an enormous challenge.
The collapse of state authority in Syria has grave ramifications for the region. The terrorist group IS poses a threat to the stability of Syria, Iraq and the entire region. IS persecutes and murders all people who don’t bow to their control, acting across borders.
We’re currently being forced to witness a similar phenomenon in West Africa. The terrorist group Boko Haram is taking advantage of weak state structures, is benefiting from the real or alleged disadvantage of broad sections of the population and is using barbaric terrorism to tyrannise innocent people, including beyond the borders of Nigeria. The international community, including numerous Arab and Muslim countries – which is a good, positive message in favour of the international order – are putting up a resolute stand to the slaughter.
It’s a humanitarian imperative as well as in Germany’s own interests to make a substantial contribution to this. A week ago, the German Bundestag thus approved a Federal Armed Forces training mission for northern Iraq. Together with a series of international partners – the US, Italy, the Netherlands and many others, – we want to support the Iraqi and Kurdish security forces in their efforts to ward off the terrorism of IS.
We’ve also expressed our willingness to stand by African countries in their fight against Boko Haram. We’re doing this – as in Mali – in the belief that threats to our country’s security do not only stem from within our borders. Collapse of states, poverty, terrorism and epidemics may originate far from our front doors, but we’d be mistaken to think that Europe and our country will be spared their effects.
The terrorist attacks on the journalists of the satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo, on police officers and customers in a Kosher supermarket in Paris a few weeks ago served as a poignant demonstration of what a direct threat international terrorism poses to us.
The international community is responding by continuing its determined fight against Islamist terrorism. Thus Germany is for example also using its current Presidency of the G7 to pursue its intensive efforts to put paid to the flow of funding and fighters which support international terrorism.
We’re also taking important measures at the domestic level, for instance by preventing people intending to fight from leaving Germany and by prosecuting terrorist groups. Thus, in future, anyone intending to leave Germany in order to take part in or receive training for serious acts of violent subversion will be liable to prosecution. In January the German Government approved a draft law on enabling, in future, Jihadis’ passports to be confiscated to prevent them from leaving the country. Moreover we plan on making funding terrorism in itself a criminal offence.
In this fight we stand side by side with the overwhelming majority of Muslims in Europe who have nothing to do with terrorism. Especially in Germany, Islamic communities and associations have clearly and unequivocally raised their voices against the abuse of their religion to justify hate and violence.
Ladies and gentlemen, the attacks in Paris, the international Ebola epidemic, the refugee crisis in the Mediterranean – all of this shows us the extent to which foreign and security policy impacts matters concerning the internal politics of our societies. The crises in West Africa, the Maghreb, the Horn of Africa as well as Yemen and elsewhere show how much an entire region’s development depends on whether and how we can guarantee basic security. People need security to thrive. States need security to foster development and prosperity. Regions need security to develop structures together.
By the same token, many of these crises stem from the dysfunctional political systems of individual countries and regions. Regional conflicts, domestic conflicts over distribution of wealth, insufficient inclusiveness of political processes, inadequate education systems and healthcare provision – all of these aspects undermine long-term stability, the actual or perceived legitimacy of governments and thus ultimately also the enforcement of state authority.
The German Government is therefore convinced that it’s also in the interest of our own security for us to adopt a comprehensive approach to stabilising fragile states and regions. We must help to bolster functioning state structures. One aspect here is the ability of their respective security services to function. We must include them, too, in our efforts. Security and development must go hand-in-hand.
In this regard we consider training security forces to be very important. At the same time we must ensure that these forces have sufficient material equipment to be able to fully live up to their task – and I here I also mean ensuring the protection of human rights. I still think it’s important for us to consistently pursue our goal of equipping and bolstering security forces and providing them with the funding they need. The upcoming European Council on the Common Security and Defence Policy will offer us another opportunity to do this in June.
Over the past decade, the international community was also intensively and comprehensively engaged in achieving these goals in Afghanistan. Together with the Afghans we have certainly made progress there. We’ve created an education and healthcare system and we’ve built up the Afghan army and police. Compared to 2001, the Afghan people enjoy a better quality of life. The economy has also steadily developed over the years. A lively civil society and a broad media landscape have come into being. Above all we’ve achieved our most important goal: there’s no longer an international terrorist threat stemming from Afghanistan.
Nevertheless, we are not overlooking the fact that the everyday security situation for the people in Afghanistan is anything other than satisfactory. Corruption and the trade in illicit drugs have not been sufficiently curbed either, and a proper reconciliation process has yet to take place. That is why we must now do all we can to preserve the progress we’ve made and to build on it.
In order to do so we need a healthy dose of realism, ongoing commitment and strategic patience. This task is likely to span a generation rather than a few years. Afghanistan’s security sector will continue to need substantial international support beyond 2016, and not just in terms of funding. Together with our international partners and the Afghan Government, we will create the framework conditions for this over the upcoming months.
Ladies and gentlemen, today’s international order is based on the bitter experiences of two world wars. It draws its strength from the fundamental principles of law and freedom and our determination to stand up and defend these values. It’s the foundation which allows us to live almost entirely in peace and stability, at least here in Europe.
In other regions we face mammoth tasks. Given that in 1948 nearly all countries adopted the United Nations’ Universal Declaration of Human Rights and pledged to uphold it, we still have a long way to go before its principles are respected and implemented. That means we have much to do. Since then our international order has never been inflexible, and neither is it today. It has been and will continue to be further developed – not through its abuse but through intense engagement and joint dialogue. Germany stands ready to do this. Thank you.
Mr President,
Ladies and gentlemen,
In just a few days’ time, we in Germany will be celebrating 25 years of German unity. In Europe we will be celebrating the end of the Cold War. What had been a divided Europe grew together in peace and freedom. Many had dreamt of this for decades, but hardly anyone believed it possible. Today, though, we know this: nothing has to remain as it is. Change, change for the better, is possible. And we also know that every great plan has its seed in the mind.
Today we are united here in our goal of eradicating absolute poverty by 2030 – another goal which not all that long ago was too often dismissed as a pipedream. But now, 15 years on from the adoption of the Millennium Development Goals, it is clear that we can in fact manage to achieve it. We have already come half way. Absolute poverty has been halved. This gives us every reason to believe that we will manage the next stage too.
We want to change our world. And we can. We want to give the world a more humane face. And we can. That is what the 2030 Agenda is for. To this end, we are adopting new goals which cover the entire spectrum of global development and which apply to all, industrial and developing countries alike. If we are to achieve these goals, we need a new global partnership.
In order to establish such a global partnership, we need, firstly, efficient structures at all levels – national, regional and global. That is why we in Germany will further develop our National Sustainability Strategy in the light of the 2030 Agenda. As early as 2016, Germany will be one of the first states to report on implementation in the High-level Political Forum. Germany also supports regional organisations and partnerships which allow efforts to be combined. Furthermore, we are committed to strong global structures enabling us to master challenges which would overwhelm individual states.
The Ebola epidemic in West Africa was one such challenge. It was a bitter warning which made it abundantly clear that good interaction among all stakeholders, with a reformed World Health Organization at the centre, is absolutely crucial. Together with Ghana and Norway, we asked the Secretary-General of the United Nations to set up a High-level Panel to identify the correct lessons from this epidemic and to ensure that the world will be able to respond faster and more effectively in future.
Seventy years after its foundation, the United Nations as a whole, with its unique legitimacy, is still indispensable when it comes to resolving the issues facing humanity. But it, too, needs to adapt to new challenges. Germany will play an active part in the necessary reform process.
Secondly, a global partnership needs the necessary financial resources. Viable structures will enable us to make efficient use of these resources. The Financing for Development Conference in Addis Ababa in July showed how such resources can be mobilised.
Germany stands by the obligation to use 0.7 percent of its GDP for development assistance. Our development assistance budget will increase substantially in each of the next few years. State support is important, but it can only be one aspect: private investment, too, is crucial for the development of our states. Mobilising such investment must be a focus of our policy.
In Paris at the end of the year, we want to adopt an ambitious climate agreement which obliges all states to do more for climate protection. This agreement would fix the framework for a sustainable development path to keep global warming below two degrees. For this we need a shared vision of how to attain decarbonisation at global level before the end of this century. Here, too, the right investment is necessary. It is important – and Germany will do its part – that the industrialised countries stick to the pledge they made in Copenhagen and make 100 billion dollars a year available to the developing countries for climate protection from 2020. In this way, we will create the confidence that all countries in the world can develop in a climate-friendly manner and that particularly vulnerable countries can receive help to adapt to climate change.
The key prerequisite for successful development is and will remain peace. But millions of people – more than at any time since the Second World War – are being forced to flee war, terror and violence. Their suffering is exacerbated by their lack of prospects for the future and by the destruction of their environment. Anyone who witnesses the suffering of those who have left their homes to seek protection and a future elsewhere, and who is aware of the challenge facing the countries which take in the refugees, knows that in the end there can be but one solution: we must tackle the causes of flight and expulsion.
The 2030 Agenda provides the right framework for this. It balances economic, ecological and social aspects of development. Each and every one of us should, indeed must, work to implement this Agenda – so that people the world over can live a life in dignity. This must be our shared aspiration. By agreeing on the Agenda we are setting the course for efforts to tackle the causes. The priority now is to work towards this end at all levels – national, regional and global. Germany will do so.
Thank you very much.

Director-General, dear Tedros Mr Ryan, Mr Schwartländer, Federal Minister, dear Jens Spahn, Governing Mayor, dear Michael Müller Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen,
Listening to all your words of praise, I was thinking of everything that hasn’t been achieved yet – so that I can put everything back into perspective. Nevertheless, I’d like to express my gratitude for the award and for the kind comments.
And I’m equally grateful to the staff of the World Health Organization for the work it undertakes on a daily basis. Indeed, the work of this body has always been close to my heart.
I’m therefore especially pleased that we are inaugurating the new WHO office, the Hub, in Berlin today. On behalf of many people in Germany I’d like to bid you a very warm welcome to our country.
I believe – and I say this with a measure of pride, which the Governing Mayor and the German Government can also have – that Berlin is an excellent base. For with the Charité, the Robert Koch Institute, the Hasso Plattner Institute close by in Potsdam and the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, we have an incredible amount of expertise and institutional networking here. Jens Spahn pointed out that Berlin is also a start-up city. So there will be no lack of ideas here.
I believe that this centre, this hub, also reflects Germany’s high regard for the WHO’s work.
Of course, the hub is not merely a matter between Germany and the World Health Organization. Rather – and we heard this in today’s impressive discussion – it will collect, gather and evaluate data from around the world. This centre’s findings are to be shared with all countries.
I think it’s very symbolic that Fabiola Gianotti, the head of CERN, an organisation which really has done good work in fostering global networks in the scientific field, told us more today about cooperation structures. It’s a bit more difficult when we turn from CERN to the World Health Organization. Because, to a certain degree, it has to move out of the research sphere and into practical application. However, the basic structure of CERN – which represents multilateralism in practice – is certainly a good blueprint for this hub.
We want to be better equipped to deal with future epidemics and pandemics. Tedros has just described how we tried to respond to Ebola and how we convened the first meetings of G20 Health Ministers. Back then, to be honest, it was not so clear to me that a pandemic could one day also hit us here in Europe. We tried to prevent something like that from coming to Europe. Now, however, we have experienced it. And I think that we really have to learn new lessons from this.
I’m delighted that Chikwe – I’ll take the liberty of calling him Chikwe because I find it so difficult to pronounce his surname – is going to be a link between this hub and Africa. I don’t think people in Nigeria are happy that he’s coming to Germany. However, I’m convinced that you will keep on making it clear to us here in particular that we need to maintain contacts with other continents and especially with the African continent.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also shown how much we can achieve if we join forces. Experts from around the world have expanded their knowledge at a truly impressive speed and also shared it time and again in an attempt to decode the coronavirus.
I can tell you that we Germans were of course a little proud that the first PCR test was developed here at the Charité back in mid-January 2020 by Professor Drosten. We were also involved in the development of vaccines.
The fact that Katalin Karikó sat on the stage today is, of course, more than a symbol. I read your life story with great enthusiasm. We finished our studies at roughly the same time – you in Hungary and I in the GDR. Then you spent an entire life researching something, with your finding receiving little recognition at times. It was even sometimes said: “That will probably lead to nothing.” You persevered along winding paths and ultimately we were able to use the 30 years of preparatory work done by you and many others to develop one type of vaccine very quickly. That’s an impressive biography.
Back in April 2020, the G20 established the ACT Accelerator – coordinated by the World Health Organization. The only difficulty, I believe, is that nobody apart from us insiders really knows what it’s about. To make things even more complicated, we then called the vaccine pillar within this structure COVAX – which is not exactly a catchy title. COVAX’s task is to distribute vaccines around the world – and I believe that this process has now begun. We really have to be successful in this endeavour and to ensure that enough is produced for everyone. I have been visited by several African Presidents here in Germany – the vaccination rate in their countries is two percent. The great inequality becomes clear when you consider that we now have to provide incentives to our citizens to encourage them to get vaccinated. This inequality has to be addressed quickly.
Naturally, we’ve also spoken to the African Presidents about vaccine production. I’ve said many times before that I don’t believe that the right way forward is to simply waive patent rights. Rather, my view is that we have to share findings, make possible participation, issue licences quickly and, above all, to increase the number of highly trained individuals on the African continent – and thus the capabilities in the entire pharmaceutical sector. You don’t have to start with mRNA vaccines – though, of course, that would be possible. However, there is a whole range of capabilities which have to be fostered in this sphere. After all, we’ve all recognised how dependent we sometimes are on supply chains and that these supply chains haven’t always worked.
Therefore, we have to act together. And, above all, we have to understand that it’s not enough if the population of one country is vaccinated. Everyone has to be vaccinated so that new mutations don’t keep on blocking our path out of the pandemic.
To me, this pandemic has also shown how much we need the World Health Organization. It is the authority on global health and its funding should therefore be placed on a sound and reliable footing. For the WHO can help us to detect risks to public health at an early stage.
Of course, all member states need to realise that the World Health Organization’s effectiveness depends on how much responsibility they are prepared to hand over. For they cannot fight or heal something that they don’t know about.
We most certainly need these structures. And we need them not only to combat this pandemic but, of course, also for the entire Global Action Plan – as Tedros pointed out. We have countless organisations within the United Nations dealing with similar spheres. I was pleased back in 2019 when 13 organisations stated their readiness to work together to harmonise standards, exchange data and ensure that things are not done twice or three times over. We’ll have to wait and see whether this comes about. That, too, is very important. I believe that this cooperation is necessary. And I’ve told Secretary-General Guterres, whom we saw today, that we really have to make progress on developing the Global Action Plan.
The pandemic has made it more difficult to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals by 2030. It was already difficult before the pandemic. Of course, “good health for everyone” is one of the core Sustainable Development Goals. We therefore have to speed up the pace in this sphere even further in the coming years.
The Ebola crisis was a wake-up call. It brought home to us at the time that we have to put such issues on our agenda. You rightly said that the response was quicker this time. And we have to do even better in future.
In my view, our priority should be to ensure better networking among researchers. The term “networking” has played an important role here. Secondly, we have to collect and organise data. When it comes to collecting data, I have to warn you that Germany is not always the easiest country to deal with. Please don’t hesitate to approach the authorities at Land and federal level if you experience any difficulties. We have to make sure that we really do set a good example here. Of course, the hub can advise many countries. That’s the idea behind it.
It’s important – this also became clear during today’s panel discussion – that we take a One Health approach. I believe that Sabine Gabrysch and Ilona Kickbusch made this clear in relation to the social component. After the high level of specialisation there has been in the individual areas of science, to some extent this is about returning to Humboldt, to both Humboldts. With the Charité being a large and autonomous institution but connected to the Humboldt University – indeed it’s part of the university – we can say quite simply that, in addition to the disciplines of incisiveness and depth, we have to focus once more today on what Alexander and Wilhelm von Humboldt practised on a daily basis. And we want to achieve that with the help of this hub.
I hope we will collect all contributions so that confidence grows in the hub’s work. You have experience in motivating your people. You described this in a wonderful manner when you said that motivation comes from the belief in oneself, from the belief in one’s own strength and creativity. It will be good to pool all of this in one place.
I therefore hope that you will find a good environment here that will enable you to devote all your strength to improving global health and to ensuring that we are better prepared for the future crises which, unfortunately, will probably come our way.
I’d like to thank you all for coming together today to achieve this goal. It gives us hope in these sometimes quite difficult times.
Presidents,
Emmanuel Macron,
Prime Ministers,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
 
This morning – and I believe I speak for everyone present – we witnessed a moving ceremony commemorating how, on 11 November at 11 o’clock in the morning, precisely 100 years ago, word spread swiftly along the Western front that an armistice had been declared. Trumpeters on horseback signalled the ceasefire. Soldiers celebrated. Earlier, we took a look at the many emotions of the day.
 
A new term needed to be coined for that war. It came to be called the World War. In France and Great Britain, it is referred to as the Great War. Mankind had never been engulfed in such a cataclysm. When the war began, there was great euphoria, along with celebratory cries and propaganda promising swift victory. When it ended, 17 million had died. How could something like this happen in developed countries – countries that claimed to be enlightened? Technological advances were misused. Weapons of mass destruction, poison gas, bombs and submarines were employed regardless of the consequences. Basic principles of civilisation were completely ignored. General de Gaulle is reported to have said that, although Germany was defeated, we all lost. This war, with its senseless bloodshed, shows where national arrogance and military hubris can lead. It also reminds us of the disastrous consequences of a lack of dialogue and compromise in politics and diplomacy.
 
Today, one hundred years on, we look back at this war. We commemorate the victims – the women, men and children. We commemorate the soldiers who lost their lives on the front. However – and for this, dear Emmanuel, I owe you gratitude – standing still is not an option. So we must ask ourselves: What does it mean for us today?
 
We all were requested to contribute a book to the peace library. I chose Briefe an den Sohn (letters to my son) by Käthe Kollwitz. In it, a great artist from Germany writes about her two sons. One died fighting in Belgium in the early days of the war, and she desperately hoped that her other son, a medic, would survive. “The heart is a heavy burden to bear,” she writes. “Why, oh why, do the most beautiful youths die, and the old live on?”
 
It is an honour for me to stand here today, as Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany. I also want to thank Emmanuel Macron for what we were able to experience yesterday. Until recently, in Compiègne, where the armistice was signed nearly 100 years ago, a commemorative slab bore the words “the arrogance of the Germans”. We have now replaced those lines with “friendship” and “partnership”. This sends an impressive signal. It is of course also an obligation. Because, today, this is anything but self-evident – especially in view of the suffering that the Germans brought upon their neighbours, Europe and the world in two world wars. It is an extremely generous invitation, extended to friends.
 
The peace that we have today, and that we sometimes take too much for granted, is anything but a matter of course. We must work to maintain it. That is why I, too, want to express the concern that I feel during our present commemoration. The concern, for example, that national blinkers will again be put on, which could once again lead to action that simply ignores our mutual interdependence, relations and ties. We see that international cooperation, the peaceful balancing of interests, and even the European peace project, are again being called into question. We see a willingness to push through one’s own interests – if need be, by using force.
 
Last year, Mr Secretary-General, there were 222 violent conflicts in the world. 222! According to UNHCR, the number of forcibly displaced people in the world reached 68.5 million. That is more than the population of France, for example. These numbers are even more striking when we look at who is hardest hit. More than one billion children are currently affected by conflicts. Children account for 52 percent of refugees. According to estimates, up to 250,000 girls and boys are being misused as child soldiers.
 
Considering what we have experienced, and that we think we’ve learned the corresponding lessons, we should be shocked – just as we are by the images coming out of Syria and Yemen. But this should not make us speechless. First and foremost, we must not be paralysed. That, too, is indeed a lesson from history. We must not simply resign in the face of these armed conflicts – no matter how removed the fighting may be from us in Europe. We must not write off any state, religion, ethnicity or single person.
 
This means we must work towards a political solution in Syria. Different groups are engaged, but so far they are not making a joint effort. We, Emmanuel Macron and I, recently met with the Russian president and the Turkish president in Istanbul to bring together various strands of activity. I want to thank Mr de Mistura and the United Nations for everything that is being done. Many obstacles remain on the path. But we must not give up.
 
During our joint work and commemorations here, we must bear in mind that what is probably the world’s largest humanitarian catastrophe is currently unfolding in Yemen. We are not seeing many images, and this is the only thing keeping us from being shocked. Yet a lack of images must not lead to inaction. That is why Yemen was discussed in the margins of many meetings here – and I am grateful for that fact. I think the world must take action, so that a ceasefire and humanitarian access can be achieved.
 
Friends, a lack of willingness and inability to engage in dialogue are exactly what fed mistrust and the logic of war that set in motion the violent juggernaut of 1914. Lack of communication. There is a book about the First World War that refers to “sleepwalkers” – this was the main reason behind the collective failure that led to crisis and catastrophe.
 
That was precisely the conclusion to which Woodrow Wilson, the President of the United States, came at the time. With his famous fourteen points, he among other things called for a great league of nations. He proposed that an institutionalised dialogue be established through which positive pressure would be brought to bear, with a view to preventing future conflicts. We all know that the League of Nations was set up – and failed. The world witnessed Germany unleash World War Two and commit the Shoah, whereby it betrayed all civilised values and shook faith in humanity.
 
Afterwards, nothing was the same. Granted, nothing could be. The answer was to create the United Nations. The international community established a legal order and a framework for international cooperation. The foundation for this was laid with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights that the UN General Assembly adopted 70 years ago. I often wonder if, today, we were again called on as an international community to adopt such a declaration of human rights – would we be up to the task? I fear not.
 
That is why we must protect and further develop what was achieved in the immediate aftermath of the horror. I know how difficult it is to adopt binding resolutions. But we did manage to agree to ban the use of force in the UN Charter, and to make the UN Security Council the sole body authorised to use it – although the Council is unfortunately often deadlocked. I often read and feel that many ask themselves: what does the United Nations do? Of course, on a day-to-day level, the organisation does not live up to its ideals. How could it be otherwise? But does this mean we should say that life would be better without the United Nations? To that, I clearly say no. Institutions can easily be destroyed – but building them up is incredibly difficult. We all know that most of the challenges and threats we face today cannot be addressed nationally, but only through joint effort. That is why we must accept this collective responsibility.
 
It is why you, Secretary-General, dear Antonio Guterres, deserve full support. Full support for your everyday work and for the UN reform. We must put prevention at the top of the agenda. We must keep conflicts from occurring in the first place. The 2030 Agenda with its 17 Sustainable Development Goals is a good roadmap. We know that we need to fight poverty and hunger if we want peace. We know that we must create access to education, protect the environment and improve economic and social justice. In Germany, we are aware of these challenges – and we look forward to being part of the effort to implement this agenda during our two-year tenure as a non-permanent member on the Security Council.
 
The First World War demonstrated how isolationism can be our undoing. If isolationism did not provide a solution 100 years ago, then how could it today – in a world as intricately interconnected as ours, with five times the population? That is why we chose “shaping an interconnected world” to be the motto of our G20 Presidency last year. We also will work closely with France’s G7 Presidency to achieve progress in this regard. Close international cooperation based on shared values that are laid down in the UN Charter – this is the only way to overcome the horrors of the past and shape a reasonable future.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, friends: After the dread that we spread above all with the Second World War, we Germans were extended a hand of reconciliation. Great trust was placed in the young Federal Republic. This was the only way that we were able to enter the fold of the international community. An essential part of this later became the Franco-German friendship. We have forward-looking and courageous women and men to thank for this, such as Robert Schuman, Jean Monnet and Konrad Adenauer. They paved the way, so that old rivalries could be thrown aside and policies of peaceful balancing of interests and cooperation pursued. Those with political responsibility need great courage to step forward and say: I must reach a compromise. But uncompromising attitudes are certain to lead to great discord.
 
Other neighbours, too, showed tremendous character and courageously promoted reconciliation. I want to mention Wladyslaw Bartoszewski of Poland, who already prior to 1945 gave thought to how Poles and Germans could reach out to each other in the future. Only a few representatives from Poland are among us here today, because Poland is celebrating the centenary of its independence – or, more accurately, its regaining of independence with the end of the First World War, because for much more than 100 years its territory had been divided up between Germany and Russia.
 
For too long, many people in Europe could not be part of the peace project. They had been divided by the Cold War. But in Europe, we saw that what was previously divided could also be reunited – and this is especially true for us Germans.
 
I want to thank Emmanuel Macron and the initiators of this Peace Forum for making sure that the event is not attended only by politicians, but also by NGOs, unions, associations, researchers, and private citizens. Because peace cannot be purely a political project. Peace must be earned by the people in our countries. That’s why work for peace is so multi-faceted. It is therefore my sincerest hope that this effort will not be short-lived – with the life expectancy of a house fly, as we say in Germany. We want it instead to become a process. We want this armistice centenary marking the end of the First World War to give rise to a process that leads to more peace. I am not under any illusions that a rocky road lies ahead. However, if we all are convinced that we need to work together, then we may just be able to build a better world. After what we have experienced, we must seize this opportunity.
 
Thank you very much.
 
Ambassador Descôtes,
Mr Chairman, Norbert Lammert,
Johann Wadephul,
Mr Huotari,
Ladies and gentlemen
wherever you are – at the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung or following us on live stream,
 
When the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung planned today’s event, the world was still a different place. A new decade had just begun, and such a milestone always brings hope of greater peace, stability and prosperity in the world. Just a few weeks ago, the euro area member states were on a sound economic growth course. Germany was heading for its sixth year with a balanced federal budget. It went without saying that EU citizens travelled throughout the Schengen area, whether for business or private purposes, without border controls and without face masks.
 
Just a few weeks ago, it seemed inconceivable that within a matter of days liberal democracies would have to adopt comprehensive measures including travel and contact restrictions, which in this country, too, constitute the most egregious curtailment of citizens’ civil liberties since the founding of the Federal Republic of Germany. These decisions were among the most difficult I have taken in my entire time as Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany. This virus is and will remain an affront to democracy.
 
The COVID‑19 pandemic has turned our world upside down – and with it the plans for the German EU Council Presidency, which we will assume for six months on 1 July. Crisis management has become a new priority. However, we also want to retain our original priorities and continue to address the issues that will define our future, in particular how to rebuild our economy in a climate-neutral way, how to advance the digital transformation and how to strengthen Europe’s role as an anchor of stability in the world. The COVID‑19 pandemic reveals how fundamental radical shifts cause us to take decisions with very long‑term consequences in a relatively short period of time.
 
I would like to thank the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung for inviting me to this event, which is an opportunity to consider the import of these truly transformative developments in the field of foreign and security policy in particular. Considering how to analyse and categorise these changes, as you are doing at today’s event, is important not least because we are faced with conflicting demands to which political answers are needed in word and in deed.
 
On the one hand, we are all expected to adhere to rules restricting contact and imposing a minimum distance to be maintained from relatives and friends, acquaintances and colleagues, in other words from everybody outside our households, thus enabling us to look out for others by keeping our distance. On the other hand, in this crisis, it is vitally important for the European family of states to become even more cohesive. The virus knows no borders, and so our response as the European Union must not stop at national borders. We must help each other wherever possible. After all, we know that Germany will only fare well in the long term if Europe fares well. And conversely, it is good for Europe if Germany is economically and politically strong.
 
Despite all the uncertainties we face, one thing is already clear to me: Europe can emerge stronger from the crisis than it entered it. If we are to fulfil this aspiration, we must in my opinion be guided by one leitmotif: European cohesion and solidarity – especially in this pandemic. This is the leitmotif of the pan-European forward-looking crisis management that will shape the German EU Council Presidency.
 
At the beginning of the pandemic, solidarity had to be put into action very quickly, for example when it came to supplying medical equipment to badly affected European partners, taking in seriously ill patients from these countries and bringing citizens of other European countries back from abroad together with many of our own German citizens in an unprecedented repatriation programme.
 
But of course much more is needed for a sustainable economic recovery which also safeguards convergence and cohesion. We need an extraordinary exertion to respond to this extraordinary challenge. This is also the end served by the proposals presented by President Emmanuel Macron of France and myself a few days ago. Today, the European Commission added its proposal. I look forward to further discussions among EU heads of state and government in which Germany and France will act in concert and in a targeted manner.
 
However, ladies and gentlemen, I would like to see even more. I would like to see the European Union show global solidarity and assume greater responsibility as well, especially in times of crisis. In many places, the pandemic will exacerbate existing conflicts and problems and will thus also test the European Union’s ability to act in foreign and security policy. This makes it all the more important for us to champion around the globe the values that we stand for within the European Union – solidarity, democracy, freedom and the protection of the dignity of all human beings. This is also vital in the context of cooperation with our international partners, who may be even more badly affected by the COVID‑19 pandemic and its consequences than we are.
 
During our Presidency of the Council, therefore, the focus will on the one hand be on internal matters, with budgetary constraints and economic reconstruction presenting us with difficult choices. On the other hand, however, we should always remember the importance of global engagement, especially in the current situation.
 
Over the past few years, Europe has acquired the reputation of being a reliable partner – be it as a trustworthy interlocutor in international fora or, for example, as regards the Iran dossier, civilian missions in Ukraine or training missions in Mali. We must build on this. Particularly in a destabilised world, it is in our European interest to be able to serve as an anchor of stability. Itself a project between individual states, the European Union is inherently a supporter of rules‑based multilateral cooperation. This is truer than ever in the crisis.
 
The fact that we as the European Union are capable of leading a global exertion was demonstrated recently by a pledging conference initiated by the European Commission. Eight billion US dollars were raised for the development, production and distribution of vaccines, therapeutic drugs and diagnostic tests. Germany and France made an outstanding contribution to this.
 
I see our German Presidency as an opportunity to further build Europe as a force for solidarity, able to act and able to shape change, assuming responsibility for peace and security in the world.
 
With this in mind, European relations with China, for example, will also be a foreign policy priority of our EU Council Presidency. The European Union has a great strategic interest in actively shaping cooperation with China, one of the key players of this century. In my talks, I have noticed time and again that the Chinese are surprised to hear so much talk of their country’s rise. For in their own eyes, this 5000‑year‑old civilisation is simply regaining the central place on the world stage that it enjoyed for centuries. When shaping our relations in future we must therefore not focus solely on expanding trade volumes or maintaining protocol, but must come to recognise the strength of China’s determination to take a leading role in the existing international architecture. We need not only to recognise this ambition, but should also confidently rise to the challenge it presents.
 
That is why we have a number of issues on our presidency agenda concerning our relations with China. We want to conclude the investment agreement that has been under negotiation for many years. This is, admittedly, a very ambitious project. We want to make progress on climate and environmental protection. We want to advance global health and exchange views on issues including how to improve transparency standards in the context of global pandemics. We also want to discuss our respective relations with Africa and work out how we can better coordinate our engagement and set the right standards to make sustainable development possible.
 
All these issues concerning EU‑China relations are ambitious enough in themselves. What makes them even more ambitious, of course, is the fact that China is not just any partner or competitor, but a country with which we have profound differences concerning the rule of law, freedom, democracy and human rights; just think of the situation in Hong Kong with regard to the “one country, two systems” principle. However, the fact that fundamental differences exist should not be an argument against exchange, dialogue and cooperation – especially not at a time when the dispute between the United States and China is becoming increasingly acrimonious. On the contrary, open, critical and constructive dialogue is more important than ever if we are to assert our European values and interests.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, another focus of our foreign policy this year is Africa. An EU summit with the African Union is planned for October. This is intended to serve the goal of enhanced cooperation in a spirit of partnership. Joint action to combat the coronavirus will of course also have to be part – but only one part – of this. It is already foreseeable, however, that many African countries will be severely hit by the socio-economic consequences of the pandemic. We must therefore find a joint response to the question of how these consequences can be mitigated. At the same time, we can also learn a great deal from African countries’ own experiences in dealing with pandemics. Our talks with Africa will also address issues such as the climate, migration, sustainable economic development and, of course, peace and security – to give just a few examples.
 
These are all areas in which Germany and Europe have significantly stepped up their political engagement in recent years.
 
Consider, for example, the civil war in Libya. The Berlin Conference on Libya in January helped support the United Nations’ peace efforts. Developments in Libya in recent weeks underline the fact that the parties must agree to the draft ceasefire negotiated by the United Nations and return to the negotiating table for there to be any chance of stabilising the country. In Libya and beyond, it will be important to ensure that European operations and missions continue as far as possible, within the framework of the European Union’s Common Security and Defence Policy. This can only be achieved in close coordination with partners such as the United Nations.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, Europe cannot overcome the challenges outlined above if it stands alone on the world stage. Europe needs partners and allies in order to meet and rise to the key challenges of our time with combined forces.
 
Europe’s most important partner is the United States of America. I am, of course, aware that cooperation with America is currently more difficult than we would like. This is true as regards climate policy, trade policy and now also with respect to the importance of international organisations in combatting the COVID‑19 pandemic. Nevertheless, I am firmly convinced that transatlantic relations, and our cooperation and alliance with the US and within NATO are and will remain a key pillar of our foreign and security policy. It is in our own national and European interest not only to preserve this pillar but also to strengthen it. For we depend on each other to uphold the global order, to maintain peace and stability, and to tackle the major issues of our time. Only in this way can we effectively champion our causes internationally.
 
We should never forget that Europe is not neutral. Europe is part of the political West. If Europe wants to assert itself and its values in the world – and we want to, we have to – we will only succeed if we do more than before to take our fate in our own hands and act as a reliable partner for the western community of shared values and interests. I view these two things as going together. They are two sides of the same coin.
 
Of course, this also affects our relations with Russia. There are many salient reasons to seek good relations with Russia. These include geographical proximity and shared history, global challenges and mutual economic relations. Of course, the world’s largest country also has many good reasons itself to want constructive relations with the European Union and Germany.
 
That is why I have worked to foster critical and constructive dialogue and peaceful coexistence ever since I became Chancellor. These must be based on the understanding that in international relations it is not the law of the strong that prevails, but rather the strength of the law. This perception of ourselves that underlies our external relations encompasses, for example, a commitment to the Helsinki Final Act and the European Convention on Human Rights. Russia has repeatedly violated the values and rules enshrined in these documents. It has created a belt of unresolved conflicts in its immediate vicinity and annexed the Crimean peninsula from Ukraine in violation of international law. It supports puppet regimes in parts of eastern Ukraine and uses hybrid means to attack Western democracies, including Germany.
 
There is no doubt that Russia, too, will keep us busy during the EU Council Presidency. We will speak out whenever fundamental rules of international law are flouted. If no progress is made in the Minsk process, we will have to retain the existing sanctions.
 
There again, the Council Presidency gives us an opportunity to inject fresh impetus into our relations. This is important when it comes to issues such as Libya, Syria, climate protection and global health. And in this way we lend weight to our values both through our principles and our engagement.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, a virus with a diameter of 140 nanometres has become a global force to reckon with. The consequences of the pandemic will have a significant impact on our European Common Foreign and Security Policy for an indefinite period. During our Presidency, we want to help strengthen Europe internally, so that we can present ourselves to the external world as an anchor of solidarity and stability. Together we want to lead Europe to new strengths.
 
To bring my comments to a close, I would like to quote Konrad Adenauer. He was right when he said: “European unity was the dream of a few. It became the hope of many. It is now a necessity for us all.” With this in mind, I wish us all great strength to tackle the tasks ahead, and thank the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung once again for inviting me to this event. I hope you all enjoy your discussion now!
Mr Lowy, Mr Governor, Mr Hawke, Mr Keating, Mr Howard, Minister, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen,
It’s a very great honour for me to give the annual Lowy Lecture here today. I’d like to thank the Lowy Institute for International Policy for this invitation, which I was delighted to accept.
It’s true that what has brought me to Australia is the G20 Presidency. This is my first trip to this wonderful country. However, many other Germans were fascinated by Australia long before me. This vast country in the ocean holds a powerful attraction. Of course, one of the reasons for this is that from our perspective it’s on the other side of the globe. Down Under, as we say.
Some 163,000 Germans embarked on the long journey to Australia last year. I’m especially pleased that so many young people made use of the opportunity to study at one of your universities. They took advantage of the working holiday visa agreed upon by our two Governments. It really is of great practical importance.
Let me remind you of the geologist, botanist and zoologist Ludwig Leichhardt, a native of the Brandenburg region, who explored the interior of this continent in three expeditions during the 1840s. Schools and streets in both Australia and Germany are named after him today. One of Sydney’s districts bears his name. Numerous links have thus been created between our countries over the years.
Some of them, however, mark terrible chapters in our shared history. We’re especially aware of this in 2014, when we’re remembering the outbreak of the Second World War 75 years ago and the Shoah, that ultimate betrayal of all civilised values – and most particularly the outbreak of the First World War one hundred years ago. There’s a reason why the First World War is often referred to as the seminal catastrophe of the 20th century. For Australia and New Zealand, the First World War was a bitter reality. Almost exactly 100 years ago, the first 30,000 soldiers left Albany for Alexandria in Egypt on 38 ships. Prime Minister Tony Abbot spoke of their fate just a few days ago on 1 November. Tens of thousands of Australians were killed in the battles against Germany, the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the Ottoman Empire in the Dardanelles and on the Western Front, while more than 130,000 were wounded. Every year on 25 April, your country marks ANZAC Day, when you remember the landing in Gallipoli, when so many lost their lives. This is a very special day of commemoration.
Ladies and gentlemen, how could it come to this one hundred years ago? Why did peoples and nations take up arms against each other? Looking back to the time leading up to 1914, one thing in particular stands out: the lack of communication among the political elites of European states and the complete failure of diplomacy. There was a lack of suitable mechanisms and institutions which would have allowed countries to exchange views, build mutual trust and engage in cooperation. There was no readiness to accept compromises. There was no will to settle differences peacefully – partly due to an arrogant belief on both sides in their own military superiority. Yet the belief that modern wars could be contained proved to be a fatal mistake. What was initially a regional crisis in the Balkans engulfed the rest of the continent within just a few weeks.
We can’t undo what happened back then. However, we can – and indeed I would say we must – learn the right lessons from this. In 1914, national self-importance and cold-blooded military logic pushed aside responsible politics and diplomacy. In 2014, in contrast, we in Europe are striving to engage in dialogue and find peaceful solutions – no matter how difficult the negotiations may be. Today’s 28 member states of the European Union have put their faith in the power of economic, social and political integration. We have put our faith in the cohesive effect of a community of shared values. We have put our faith in institutions which are committed to the common European good. The Heads of State and Government of the 28 member states, as well as their Ministers, have regular exchanges on topical issues. We meet, we talk, we know one another. This is how to strengthen mutual trust. And trust, I think we would all agree, is the most important prerequisite for flourishing political cooperation. The precarious balance of constantly shifting alliances among states was replaced by a European legal community quite some time ago.
Nevertheless, we’ve seen that even in Europe there are still forces which refuse to accept the concept of mutual respect or the settlement of conflicts using democratic and rule-of-law means, which believe in the supposed law of the strong and disregard the strength of the law. That’s exactly what happened when Russia flouted international law and annexed Crimea at the start of the year. Russia is violating the territorial integrity and the sovereignty of Ukraine. It regards one of its neighbours, Ukraine, as part of a sphere of influence. After the horrors of two world wars and the end of the Cold War, this calls the entire European peaceful order into question. Russia is now seeking to exert influence in order to destabilise eastern Ukraine in Donetsk and Luhansk.
In this connection, I would like to remind you of the presumed shooting down of the Malaysian aircraft MH 17, which claimed the lives of so many. The victims included 38 Australians and four Germans. The Ukraine crisis really is more than a regional crisis. We can see from this example that it affects us all.
And I ask you: who would have thought that, 25 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall, after the end of the Cold War and the end of the division of Europe and the world into two blocs, something like this could happen in the heart of Europe? Outdated thinking in terms of spheres of influence which tramples international law underfoot must not be allowed to prevail. I firmly believe that it will not prevail, even though the road may be long, even though it may be arduous and bring with it many setbacks.
The approach pursued by the European Union and its partners to overcome the Ukraine crisis serves this aim. First of all, we are supporting Ukraine both politically and economically. Secondly, we will make every effort to reach a diplomatic solution to the conflict by talking to Russia. Thirdly, we have imposed economic sanctions on Russia on the necessary scale and for the requisite duration. The overriding goal of this approach is to maintain Ukraine’s sovereignty and territorial integrity, thus enabling it to decide its own future.
I’m very grateful that Australia is supporting this political approach. We decided to adopt this strategy not least against the background of the lessons we learned from history. It took centuries before the peoples and nations of Europe found their way initially to economic and later to close political cooperation. One symbol of this process was the signing of the Rome Treaties 57 years ago. These treaties are based on the conviction that European integration was and remains a question of war and peace. Furthermore, it is the key guarantor that we – with our values, our way of life and of doing business – can hold our own, even in the globalised world of the 21st century.
If the European states – which, after all, have a total of 500 million inhabitants – can speak with one voice, then they will be better heard than any individual country on its own. That’s why it’s always worthwhile making an effort to find a single European voice. I often realise in my talks around the world that the rest of the world has high expectations of Europe. To what extent we succeed in living up to these expectations, and how strong Europe is, especially in economic terms, will go a long way to determine the possibilities we have for standing up for our values – freedom, the rule of law and democracy – around the world.
Economically, Europe experienced some tough years. They were marked by the international financial and economic crisis in 2008 and 2009 which led almost seamlessly to the European sovereign debt crisis. This crisis is now under control, but it has by no means been completely overcome yet. We therefore have to resolutely remain on course, consolidate our public finances, use any leeway we have in our budgets to boost growth in a targeted fashion, launch structural reforms for more competitiveness and considerably strengthen the coordination of the economic policies of the eurozone countries. We therefore have to do now what we failed to do to an adequate extent when the euro was introduced.
Last June, the European Union adopted for the first time a strategic agenda, which is scheduled to run for the next five years. This agenda focuses on the key challenges we face. We’re thus making it clear that the European level really shouldn’t feel responsible for everything but that it has to combine its efforts.
In trying to foster competitiveness, growth and employment, we also always have to strive to make the European social and economic model, which combines economic success with social and ecological responsibility, successful on an enduring basis. There’s no denying that this is a major challenge, especially in view of the tough global competition. We Europeans are very much aware that the world isn’t waiting for us. We’re facing ever more and ever stronger rivals on the global markets.
We only have to look at the Asia-Pacific region. It consists of countries which between them now produce just under 40 per cent of global output. The region accounts for one third of the world’s exports – roughly the same as Europe. Its economic growth, 4.8 per cent on average, is among the highest in the world. China, India and Indonesia and other countries in the region play an increasingly important role in the global division of labour. What’s more, they are bringing their political influence ever more to bear, for example in the G20.
Europe not only has close economic ties with Asia. We Europeans are following very carefully those developments in the Asia-Pacific region which are relevant to security policy. Take, for example, North Korea’s nuclear programme or the territorial conflicts in the East and South China Sea. Asia is the only region in the world in which military expenditure has steadily grown since 1988 – by 3.6 per cent in 2013 alone. Furthermore, political and economic development in the Asia-Pacific region has been anything but linear, because the countries and societies of this region are too heterogeneous and they have very different histories.
The road to open, pluralistic societies can sometimes be very difficult and stony. Nevertheless, I’m confident that it holds out the prospect of greater stability in the long run. Europe will gladly help countries travelling down this road wherever it can. To this end, we can use the fora in which Europe is engaged in close dialogue with countries in the Asia-Pacific region – for example the ASEAN Regional Forum or the ASEM summit, which recently took place in Milan. In these fora, we’re guided by our hope that the rise of Asian states proceeds peacefully and without painful bumps. For that is in our own vital interest. ASEAN plays a key role here. This federation paved the way for more integration via growing economic ties. The aim is to establish the ASEAN Economic Community, which will include the economically weaker ASEAN member states, by the end of 2015. Germany and the European Union support this development.
Free trade and the prospect of a common market bring states together. That’s what we in Europe experienced – on the way from the European Coal and Steel Community to today‘s European Union. Naturally, ASEAN and the EU have very different historical, political and social foundations and experiences. So I don’t want to make too many comparisons. However, what ASEAN and the EU have in common is the will to engage in dialogue, cooperation and integration.
Finally, it’s worthwhile for every country – for smaller just as much as larger partners – to take part in multilateral processes. One key experience in these processes is that larger states are expected to make bigger concessions, that transparency and regular dialogue can avert or at least reduce misunderstandings and conflicts. For participation in multilateral processes and agreements based on international law create precisely what is needed, namely transparency and predictability on which, ultimately, trust is based.
That can help to resolve disputes, for example the maritime territorial disputes in the region. In order to reach a viable solution here, I believe it’s very important to use fora such as ASEAN and to overcome differences, for instance, also on the basis of the international law of the sea. I call upon all sides to seek confidence-building measures in order to prevent an incalculable escalation. This isn’t a purely bilateral or regional issue. The sea and trading routes link Europe to this part of the world. Their security thus has a direct impact on us in Europe.
We also have shared interests with regard to stability in other regions. The geopolitical situation is currently very critical in some parts of the world. I’ve already mentioned Ukraine. In addition to that, we are very concerned about the situation in Syria and Iraq. Another crisis is the terrible disease Ebola, which has affected many parts of West Africa, is taking on an increasingly global dimension and can only be contained through international efforts. We talked about this in great detail at the G20 summit. We can’t abandon these people, who have suffered so much – neither on humanitarian grounds nor in the belief that we’re protecting our own vested interests – for globalisation has long since ceased to be solely an economic phenomenon. It has made us all neighbours. More and more countries are faced with the same challenges.
For Germany and Europe, it’s important to know that Australia is a partner in the Asia-Pacific region which shares our values: universal human and fundamental rights as well as freedoms, democracy and the rule of law. Together we are engaged in international operations: in UN peacekeeping missions, in Afghanistan and against the IS terror in Iraq and Syria.
It’s largely thanks to Australia’s persistent efforts in the UN Security Council that humanitarian aid for those in need in Syria could be supplied without the consent of the Syrian regime. Australia also played a key role in advancing the efforts to determine how United Nations sanctions can be implemented more effectively. We coordinate closely with each other on all of these questions, as well as with our transatlantic partners. To this end, for example, the then Secretary of State Clinton and the then High Representative of the European Union Ashton agreed in 2012 to cooperate on foreign and security policy issues in the Asia-Pacific region.
We do all of this in the conviction that peace, freedom and stability are the basic prerequisites for cooperation based on partnership through which political, economic and social progress – which are in the interest of all – can be achieved. This applies, for example, to the efforts to promote free trade, open markets and the equal and competition-neutral treatment of home-grown and foreign companies.
Pooling our efforts is also the only way to advance climate protection. If climate change continues unchecked, then its disastrous consequences will be unstoppable – more storms, heatwaves and droughts will follow, sea levels will rise and there will be an increasing number of floods. Climate change knows no borders. It won’t spare the islands in the Pacific. The entire international community is responsible for ensuring sustainable development.
In the European Union, we’ve agreed that by 2030 we will reduce our greenhouse emissions by at least 40 per cent compared to 1990 levels. We also want to increase the share of renewable energy in overall consumption to at least 27 per cent by 2030. With these targets we want to send a clear signal on international climate protection ahead of the UN Climate Conference due to be held in Paris in 2015. Our goal is an ambitious agreement that will be binding for all countries. Only if we work together can we limit global warming to 2 degrees celsius. All countries are therefore called upon to announce their national contributions to the global climate agreement by the end of the first quarter of 2015 at the latest. This is the only way we can prepare properly for the conference in Paris and achieve a substantial result there.
Ladies and gentlemen, the bonds which link Australia and Germany are diverse and strong. However, as we know that what is good can be improved upon, Prime Minister Abbott and I have decided to establish a bilateral advisory group which we hope will provide further impetus for our cooperation in the political, economic and social spheres. Australia and Germany thus feel much closer than a look at a world map would lead us to believe. Let’s continue to use this closeness, let’s continue to use our partnership, let’s continue to use our close bonds for the benefit of our nations and peoples.
Thank you very much for your attention.
Julia,
Ministers,
Commissioners,
State Secretaries,
 
On behalf of the entire Federal Government, I would like to welcome you to this special event here at the International Green Week in Berlin. The fact that so many of you have come here shows the willingness to work together and to tap into the agricultural sector’s innovation potential.
 
As has already been said, the Global Forum for Food and Agriculture is also active as a platform in multilateral endeavours as a whole, ranging from Argentina’s to Japan’s G20 Presidencies. I have heard that you work together very amicably and demonstrate a very high level of flexibility as regards negotiations. That is always important.
 
Allow me to say that we are trying to be good hosts. Davos for the agricultural sector – all that is missing is the snow and the mountains. But we try to make up for this with other things in Berlin. The city has a great deal to offer, although I admit that you won’t find many agricultural firms here. But for those of you who cannot go a whole day without agriculture, a visit to Domäne Dahlem is an option, even if this open‑air agricultural museum is relatively small. But here at the International Green Week, you can certainly see enough agriculture.
 
As regards food, your focus is on food security and the fight to eradicate hunger, that is, on an issue that also plays a key role in the SDGs, the Sustainable Development Goals for 2030. A world without hunger is one of the express aims. You use innovation potential to connect things that seem mutually exclusive, namely food security with a growing world population and at times overuse of our resources. When it comes to these challenges, digital technology fundamentally offers us far more opportunities than reasons to fear. But as always, if the focus is to remain on people, we need guidance, regulations and a framework in order to safeguard legal certainty and justice.
 
You have come to Germany. In this country, and probably in your own, too, many farmers wonder what impact structural change, extreme weather, low prices and trade disputes will have on their future. Every farm is also a home. It is very much bound up with emotions, but at the same time, it has to function as a business. That is why we need to work together on this area so that we combine the sustainable use of nature, of our planet, to put it rather more dramatically, with the need to function as a business.
 
We have many opportunities. Agricultural professions in particular can become extremely appealing thanks to digital transformation. I know that start‑ups are also attending this event. One of the opportunities, naturally, is that hard physical labour will no longer be required. Robots can already do a great deal in dairy sheds. I had a chance to see that for myself last summer. Farm‑management systems can make bookkeeping and planning easier. This means we can already see in some farms today – and not only in large ones – what the future will look like. We in Germany are trying to focus on smaller and medium‑sized farms. In that context, I have to think about the European Commissioners. Naturally, we are following everything that is being discussed in the Commission. I come from a region where larger farms are more common. In other regions, farms tend to be small. However, I don’t want to bore you now with internal EU discussions.
 
Technical progress is being made in leaps and bounds. For example, every second cow in Northwest Europe will probably be milked by robots by 2025. Digital developments are often achieved even faster. Nevertheless, I think it will be a major problem for us in Germany at any rate to provide support for the generation change. But the better the material and economic situation is in farms, the faster innovations will catch on.
 
In order for farmers to be able to make use of the opportunities afforded by digital technology in the first place, however, we need to install high‑tech digital infrastructure. We still have a lot to do in Germany in this regard. But I imagine that things are no different in other countries. Julia Klöckner, our Federal Minister of Food and Agriculture, is highly committed when it comes to connecting rural regions to the internet – and not just to any sort of internet, but naturally to high‑speed internet as soon as possible. However, as we see that this does not work in rural regions through market‑economy forces alone, we need to provide state support. Precision agriculture, to which I will return later on, is a classic example of how it is not enough simply for a farmhouse to have an internet connection. Farmers need internet access throughout areas measuring many hectares. That is why this is a major topic, as otherwise there would be no need to talk about digital transformation in large sectors.
 
The traditional sector of agriculture must therefore – this is Germany’s policy at any rate and I think it is the same in almost all countries – be firmly rooted in our countries’ economic and value‑added policies. The agricultural sector also plays a role in preserving the landscape and culture. It plays a part in renewable resources and naturally in food supply.
 
According to United Nations estimates, an additional two to three billion people will have to be fed by 2050. That means agriculture will have to produce around two‑thirds more. But even today, we have not yet managed to banish hunger from the world. It is therefore becoming increasingly important that we find new paths, also in order to prevent ecological damage or, in cases where farming is still not ecological, to change this. Food production can and must be increased, particularly in countries that we commonly refer to as “developing countries”. That is why we must improve various things.
 
The first thing we need to improve is access to markets and resources. We also need to make investment conditions better in general. Those of us who live in Europe have our own problems with this. However, I have also looked in depth at the situation in African countries. When you see the interest rates on loans and how difficult it is to get a loan in the first place, you realise that people face huge problems there. Although it does not directly involve agriculture, that is why we launched an initiative called Compact with Africa during our G20‑Presidency in which we encourage countries to make their financial parameters more transparent and to work with the World Bank and IMF. In return, we are improving access to loans and working with the African Development Bank. I think this is very important, as countries cannot allow themselves to become dependent in a way that creates good prospects for perhaps two or three years, but then leaves them in debt and unable to generate sustainable development.
 
Good governance is vital for good cooperation. You are here as representatives of your countries. If I may take the liberty of saying so, many countries have very different problems to those we face in Europe. The average age is increasing in Europe, whereas in Asia and even more so in Africa, there is an incredibly high percentage of young people, all of whom want to have a future. These young people often have a smartphone before they have permanent access to electricity. If they have a smartphone, then they know what is possible in the world. These young people want to have a say and to be part of an active civil society. That is why I would like to ask you not to fear an active civil society, but rather to make use of the opportunity that people can have a say and determine their own lives. Naturally, people also want security as regards their property rights. And we must do everything we can to create and safeguard social peace.
 
Secondly, as well as improving access to markets and resources, modern, environmentally responsible methods adapted to regional needs are required in order to boost production and productivity. Innovation is needed to meet increasing demand. I am aware that many countries that still have, so to speak, very family‑oriented and low‑tech farming, are now facing an enormous leap forward. Even if we use development aid to teach people the latest farming methods and show them the best machinery, there are still often conflicts over fields. And questions arise such as whether it is possible to work with a neighbour and their machinery, that is, to merge land, the best way to do this and the risks entailed. This will involve an enormous cultural process in many areas.
 
We need to face up to digital transformation. Weather forecasts are the easiest part of this. Information is available online about new cultivation methods and pest control. What is also very important is that people can compare prices. They cannot be blackmailed by just anyone. Instead, they can use their internet access to look up prices. Direct marketing becomes far more straightforward. AMIS, the G20 Agricultural Market Information System, has become a pretty good instrument for making harvest forecasts and prices for rice, corn, wheat and soya more transparent and helping to curb price fluctuations, thus preventing famine to a certain extent.
 
None of this – and that, too, is becoming apparent – can be achieved without international cooperation. Those who believe they can resolve all these issues for their country on their own and cheat others will end in abysmal failure. I firmly believe that. That is why it is so important that your event is also a good example of international cooperation. Naturally, there is no one‑size‑fits‑all solution. The problems are completely different, not only between countries in the North and South for example, but also in the countries themselves, as I already showed, using Germany as an example. That means we need to find solutions for small, medium and huge farms.
 
Naturally, we also need to ensure that we preserve biodiversity and the ability of soil and ecosystems to regenerate. If we look at the species extinction that can be seen worldwide, we see it is a huge topic, including here in Germany.
 
Climate change is reaching ever‑larger parts of the world. Africans have known for a long time what this means in their countries, particularly in the Sahel. But here in Germany, too, we are also seeing that climate change is having a huge impact on conditions. This is not shown by a single summer, but in the meantime we can definitely see how certain types of plants no longer thrive in some regions in Germany the way they did a century ago. That is why we can already say that climate change is the ecological challenge of our era.
 
And that is why we also want to do our utmost to ensure that we can adhere to the Paris Climate Agreement. Sustainable agriculture will be one element in this. The aim is to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius or less. However, we must honestly say that not all sectors can make the same contribution. For the agricultural sector, for example, it is not so easy to reduce CO2 emissions, particularly in animal farming. We now have very interesting research methods that show how food and CO2 emissions are connected. We still have a long way to go. If we say that economies must be almost entirely decarbonised by the end of this century, this means agriculture is one of the sectors that will have to play a part here until the end.
 
Another important question, one that is a huge concern for us with regard to large parts of the world, is our approach to our forests. As long as wood is still needed for heating, there can be no talk of ecological sustainability. That is why the topic of renewable energies and agriculture is naturally extremely important.
 
Intensive farming, involving a high nitrogen input and the extensive use of pesticides, is of course also a problem. Precision agriculture is the ideal solution here. Digital technology, which can be both a curse and a boon, fosters individualisation all over the world. In some cases, we no longer reach people at all because everyone has their own sources of information where they exchange views. At the same time, this technology enables us to look at each and every plant and to enter information on specific plants, thus reducing the need for fertilisers and making forecasts possible. When artificial intelligence and its forecasting methods are added to the mix, we will be able to do absolutely wonderful things that still seem very unlikely to us today. Julia Klöckner just told me how certain pests can be detected at an early stage and how individual plants can be fertilised. Naturally, that is something I very much welcome. If drones make precision farming possible, consumers stand to benefit in the end.
 
Of course, digital technology also affects all kinds of marketing methods. This can help to prevent the losses that occur even in countries where sadly many people still do not have enough to eat.
 
Naturally, we also point out the risks. You do the same thing when you ask who owns data and who is responsible for it. Whoever controls data will essentially decide in the future where value‑added will be generated, as whoever holds the data will be able to set the prices. That is why we also need to create rules on competition in the data sector. We need to put security measures in place for users. We also hear a lot of complaints in Europe – I say this very frankly – because we sometimes tend to choose bureaucratic solutions. But fundamentally, our General Data Protection Regulation, with certain security aims, is really of the utmost importance. We also need to find a global solution here. And you, who have come here in such great numbers today, will play a role in this.
 
On the one hand, therefore, you are in the midst of an enormous development with huge potential and, if we think about what things were like 50 years ago, fantastic and scarcely conceivable possibilities. On the other hand, however, you are also in the midst of a development in which people who have nothing whatsoever to do with agriculture may end up owning all of the relevant data merely because they run a platform, thus enabling them to take over a large part of value‑added from the agricultural sector. This forum is very helpful as regards finding the right balance between seeing the needs of the agricultural sector and putting the focus on people who work in this sector. That is why I was very happy to come here and to pay what you might call an unorthodox visit to the International Green Week. Julia Klöckner commended this forum to me and I am very glad that I accepted the invitation.
 
I hope that you will have excellent discussions, produce a good final communiqué and make good progress. And in the brief time that your host may allot you for leisure activities, I hope you will have a chance to enjoy the German capital, Berlin. It has been a privilege to speak to you. Thank you very much indeed.
Presidents,
Esteemed colleagues,
Esteemed colleagues from the parliaments,
Mr Ischinger,
Ladies and gentlemen,
 
And, of course, allow me also to welcome the Minister-President of the Free State of Bavaria. I believe that Munich is an excellent city to host this conference. Bavaria’s strength is on display in a very special way here. We have other beautiful cities in Germany, but Munich is taking centre-stage today.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, we are marking the 250th anniversary of Alexander von Humboldt’s birth in 2019. Alexander von Humboldt lived on the threshold of industrialisation. He was a scholar and traveller who was driven by the urge to understand and see the world as a whole, a passion that yielded a great deal of success. His motto, as his Mexican travel diary from the year 1803 reveals, was “everything is interaction”.
 
About 200 years later, in 2000, after researching the hole in the ozone layer and its chemical interactions, Nobel laureate Paul Crutzen concluded that we were embarking upon a new geochronological age. The Ice Age and the interglacial period are over, and we have now entered the Anthropocene. In 2016, this definition was subsequently adopted by the International Geological Congress. This means that we are living in an age in which humankind’s traces penetrate so deeply into the Earth that future generations will regard it as an entire age created by humans. These are traces of nuclear tests, population growth, climate change, exploitation of raw materials, and of microplastics in the oceans. And these are but a few examples of the things that we are doing today.
 
All of this has implications for global security and for the issues that are being discussed right here, right now. It therefore makes sense to take a look at how this conference started life in 1963 – as a conference on military science, or “Wehrkunde” in German, still dominated by the aftermath of the Second World War and National Socialism in Germany; an event with a particularly pronounced transatlantic focus. This is why I’m also delighted that so many representatives from the US are with us here today. We are meeting today at a comprehensive security conference, where we are discussing the energy supply, development cooperation and, of course, defence issues and a comprehensive approach to security. This is precisely the right response.
 
We must think in terms of interlinked structures, of which the military component is only one. But what we sense at the beginning of the 21st century – we are now in the second decade of the 21st century – is that the structures in which we operate are essentially those that emerged from the horrors of the Second World War and National Socialism, but that these structures are coming under incredible pressure because developments require them to undergo reform. However, I don’t think that we can simply take an axe to these structures. This is why the heading of this security conference is “The Great Puzzle”. Allow me to start with the first part of this topic. Rivalry between great powers – this alone offers us an insight into the fact that something that we regarded as a whole, as an architecture of the world, is under pressure, and is even likened to a puzzle, i.e. something that breaks up into pieces.
 
Thirty years ago – an anniversary that we are set to mark this year – the Berlin Wall fell, and with it the Iron Curtain disappeared. The Cold War came to an end. Back then, people asked themselves whether we still need an organisation like NATO. Today, we know that, yes, we need NATO as an anchor of stability in turbulent times. We need it as a community of shared values, because we should never forget that we established NATO not only as a military alliance, but also as a community of shared values in which human rights, democracy and the rule of law are the guiding principles of joint action.
 
The fact that NATO continues to be immensely attractive to this day became apparent to us in recent months during the wrangling over whether North Macedonia, as we can fortunately now all call this country, can also become a NATO member. I would simply like to thank the two principal players, Prime Minister Zoran Zaev from North Macedonia and Alexis Tsipras, the Greek Prime Minister, most sincerely for their courage. They will be presented with the Ewald von Kleist Award this evening for their efforts. In view of the many conflicts that we face today and for which we have yet to find a solution, this is a good example of how solutions can be found if we take a courageous approach. I had already given up thinking about further combinations of names in the meantime, because I thought it was a lost cause anyway. Now you have met with success. Permit me to offer you my most sincere congratulations on this achievement!
 
There are, however, a great number conflicts that challenge us, and this is the subject of the discussions that we are holding here. I would like to start with one issue that is a particular focus of my work, and also for many others among us, namely our relationship with Russia. Russia, in the form of the Soviet Union, was, in a manner of speaking, the antagonist during the Cold War. After the Berlin Wall fell, we certainly hoped – the NATO-Russia Founding Act came into being at that time – that we could make improvements to our coexistence. When I recall now how in 2011, on the fringes of this security conference, the instruments of ratification for the New START disarmament treaty were exchanged between Hillary Clinton and Sergey Lavrov, then today, in 2019, this feels like quite a long time ago. But back then, both Clinton and Lavrov hailed this as a milestone of the strategic partnership. I say this to illustrate what has happened in recent years and to point out that, on the other hand, things may look completely different again in a few years from now if the different sides work with each other. I would therefore like to thank Jens Stoltenberg most sincerely for not only invoking the NATO-Russia Founding Act time and again during the most difficult times we have had in recent years, but also for seeking dialogue. Thank you very much indeed for this!
 
Crimea was annexed in March 2014 – in what was a clear violation of international law – and then – Petro Poroshenko is here today – came the attack on eastern Ukraine, which was followed by a painstakingly negotiated ceasefire that was fragile but kept stable by the Minsk Agreement, with which Germany and France together with Russia and Ukraine are endeavouring to resolve the conflict. However, we must admit that we are far from achieving a solution; we must continue to work on this at all costs.
 
For us Europeans, if I may say so, the really bad news this year was the termination of the INF Treaty. After not decades, but years of violations of the terms of the treaty by Russia, this termination was inevitable. We all supported this as Europeans. Nevertheless, this is – and I say this to our American colleagues – a most interesting constellation. The US and Russia, as the legal successor to the Soviet Union, are terminating a treaty that was essentially agreed for Europe’s sake, a disarmament treaty that affects our security, and we, of course, with our elementary interests, will do everything in our power to facilitate further steps towards disarmament. Blind rearmament cannot be our response to this.
 
However, since a representative from China is here today, I would say that disarmament is something that concerns us all, and we would, of course, be pleased in this regard if such negotiations were held not only between the US, Europe and Russia, but also with China. I know that there are many reservations about this, and I don’t want to go into details about this right now. But we would welcome this.
 
In response to the events in Ukraine, we said in Wales in 2014 that not only the fight against terrorism, such as in Afghanistan, but also Alliance defence were once again at the forefront of our efforts. Back then, the objective of developing the military expenditure of each country towards two percent of its respective GDP was updated once again. I never tire of pointing out that this was already a goal at the beginning of the 2000s. All those who wanted to become new members of NATO were told at the outset that if they did not take steps in the direction of two percent, then they would not be admitted to NATO in the first place. – That was before my time as Federal Chancellor.
 
Germany is now facing criticism in this regard. I will address this matter later on. We have, however, increased our defence expenditure from 1.18 percent in 2014 to 1.35 percent. We aim to reach 1.5 percent by 2024. For many this is not enough, but for us it is an essential leap.
 
Of course, we must also ask ourselves what we’re doing with this money. Let me put it this way: if we all fall into recession and have no economic growth, then defence spending will be easier. But I’m not so sure that this will stand to benefit the Alliance. This is why it is important that we have such benchmarks. However, we must also consider what tangible contribution we are making.
 
Germany is doing its part. We have now been in Afghanistan for 18 years and have around 1300 German servicewomen and -men stationed there. We are working with 20 partner countries in northern Afghanistan. My most sincere request is that we – this is the first and only deployment under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty, which we have been engaged in together for a very long time – also discuss the issues of further development together. We have had to work hard to convince our people that our security is indeed being defended on the Hindu Kush. I really do not want to see us one day having to turn our backs on this and walk away as we have extremely interconnected capacities in the region.
 
We are a framework nation in Lithuania and have for the second time assumed the leadership of NATO’s spearhead force. I don’t want to list everything here. However, all of these are things that are very useful, especially as far as Alliance defence is concerned. We are therefore also prepared to do our part.
 
We are now playing an active role also outside NATO, for instance in Mali. For Germany, this is a giant step and one to which we are, culturally speaking, not as accustomed as our French friends. It was no coincidence that a discussion took place this morning between the President of the European Union during the rotating Presidency of the Council and the new President of the African Union, the Egyptian President Abdul Fattah Al-Sisi – congratulations on your election, which was just a few days ago.
 
The questions surrounding development in Africa and relations with Africa will challenge us as Europeans in a different way than, for example, the US. There will not always be NATO missions here. I would therefore ask you not to think of our efforts to achieve a coherent European defence policy as something that is directed against NATO, but as something that makes cooperation within NATO more efficient and feasible, because we can overcome many of the inefficiencies that exist among the many member states that are in the European Union and in NATO if we also develop a common military culture and if we improve the way in which our weapons systems are organised.
 
Germany is set to face a mammoth task in this regard, I can tell you. We now want to develop joint weapons systems. The issue of arms exports naturally also played a role in connection with the Treaty of Aachen, which we signed with France. If we in Europe do not have a common culture of arms exports, then the development of common weapons systems is, of course, at risk. In other words, we cannot talk about a European army and a common arms policy or arms development if we are not prepared at the same time to pursue a common arms export policy. We still have many complicated discussions on this subject ahead of us in Germany. I don’t think I’m telling you anything that you don’t already know here.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, alongside relations with Russia, the fight against terrorism is a major challenge for us, also in addition to the euro crisis, of course. In 2014/2015, we conducted very intensive negotiations with Greece about remaining in the eurozone. We then had to grapple with the refugee issue on a massive scale. The refugee issue has been fuelled by the situation in Syria, a civil war that has also been beset with terrorist challenges. The security issues that we faced were therefore of a very different nature compared with the ones that we face, for example, in the context of Alliance defence. Europe was forced to ask itself whether or not we are prepared to assume responsibility in an all-consuming humanitarian drama. That so many refugees came to Europe had to do with the fact that we had not previously addressed the situation of the refugees in Jordan, Lebanon and Turkey, where three million or more had already arrived. The stability of these countries was genuinely at risk. The upshot was refugees placing their trust in smugglers and traffickers and deciding to take their fate into their own hands.
 
Against this backdrop, Europe then embraced on a task – not just Germany, incidentally, but also Sweden, Austria and other countries: we provided assistance in a humanitarian emergency. But I think we all agree that states’ response to humanitarian emergencies cannot be for human traffickers and people smugglers to take control and for the refugees to be exposed to countless dangers, but that the right response was to create the EU-Turkey agreement.
 
For Germany, it was the right response to then also increase its expenditure on development assistance. During the same period – during the time when the Wales decisions to move towards two percent within NATO were adopted – we increased our development assistance expenditure to the same degree, because we are convinced that this, too, is a security issue. If we do not finally undertake sufficient payments for humanitarian assistance, for the Welthungerhilfe and for the UNHCR – and we are already one of the largest international donors – so that people’s livelihoods can be improved with their help, the refugee crisis will continue. The willingness of the German people, for example, to help, was outstanding, but we nonetheless need to solve the problems on the ground. That is what we are in the process of learning. So that was a parallel challenge that I consider as important from a security policy perspective as boosting our ability to honour our commitments within the Alliance.
 
Developments in Libya – also with regard to Europe or in this case Italy – have given us a foretaste of an issue that is becoming increasingly relevant: What direction will developments on the African continent take? In Libya, the instability of the state has resulted in this Libya becoming the starting point as it were for many African refugee flows, although our Spanish friends faced these challenges in connection with Morocco much earlier, ten or 15 years previously. That prompted the European Union to be much more consistent and resolute in developing the Partnership for Africa.
 
But let’s be honest: we are still in the early stages of this partnership. For if development in sub-Saharan Africa, but also in Egypt, in Morocco, in Tunisia and in Algeria does not progress in a way that gives young people opportunities and hope, that gives them prospects for a life in these countries, we will not be able to tackle the prosperity gap between Europe and Africa.
 
We can see that in recent years China has pursued development policy in Africa on a large scale in the form of investment. We can see that we in Europe have implemented traditional development policy to a considerable extent. I have often talked with President Xi Jinping about how we can learn from one another with regard to what each of us does well. But we have not yet drawn up a development policy agenda with which we could say that investment will ultimately create enough jobs to ensure security, peace and stability in these countries, too.
 
Again Germany has said the following, which in the early days of the Federal Republic of Germany was not an essential part of our historical understanding: Okay, we will support the G-5 Sahel troops, which are striving to fight terrorism. We are engaged in Mali and are working to tackle terrorism there in cooperation with the United Nations. We are on the ground in Mali working to train the armed forces. But all that will be in vain if these countries don’t have any economic prospects. And that is why we have increased our development assistance. But I want to reiterate that the methodology behind this development assistance has so far not been worked out in detail; that is something we can only do together with the African Union.
 
I am very pleased that the African Union now has clear strategic ideas – the Agenda 2063 and other plans – in which Africa is stating what it wants. For we need what these days is described as “ownership” in what has almost been adopted as a German word. People in Africa need to feel themselves: “These are our programmes.” If multilateral cooperation has improved in recent years, I have to say that in my view the African Union is certainly a good example of it.
 
So, ladies and gentlemen, those are the problems I wanted to outline for you and on which Germany is working. Now I want to turn to the question of the methodology of our cooperation. For the transatlantic alliance is, of course, in essence a defence alliance. The Foreign Ministers meet very frequently, but for many years we have discussed with France whether it is permissible also to discuss political issues. My theory is that NATO will only do justice to its responsibilities if it keeps its focus on the concept of networked security. I think that is happening to some extent. For none of these numerous conflicts can be resolved by military means alone.
 
Tensions, of course, run high in connection with what the answers should look like. What are the answers with regard to Ukraine? As far as the Minsk agreements are concerned, we are united. My heartfelt request is that implementation of sanctions against Russia be properly coordinated again if the situation escalates further – soldiers are now in the Kerch Strait. We won’t achieve anything if everyone implements their own sanctions. The third point is that we continue to support the NATO-Russia Founding Act. Communication channels need to remain open.
 
Then there is a fourth point: economic cooperation. There is already a wide range of discussions taking place on this issue – take the example of Nord Stream 2. I can understand Petro Poroshenko, who is sitting here and saying: Ukraine is a transit country for Russian natural gas, and wishes to remain so. I have assured him time and again that we will give him every possible support and conduct negotiations on this issue, and we will continue to do that, the election campaign notwithstanding. A Russian gas molecule is a Russian gas molecule, whether it comes via Ukraine or via the Baltic Sea. That means that the question of how dependent we are on Russian gas cannot be resolved by asking which pipeline it flows through. There, too, I say: I am ready. Nobody wants to become totally and unilaterally dependent on Russia. But if we even imported Russian gas during the Cold War – I was still in the GDR then and we consumed Russian gas there anyway, but the former Federal Republic then started importing large amounts of Russian gas – then I don’t know why the situation today should be so much worse that we can’t say that Russia remains a partner.
 
Let me ask you – again, it isn’t easy to say this in the presence of President Poroshenko on the left from where I’m standing and the Chinese representative on the right: Do we want to make Russia dependent on China or rely on China to import its natural gas? Is that in our European interests? No, I don’t think so, either. We also want to be involved in trade relations. That, too, is something we need to discuss frankly.
 
Although there is already very high LNG capacity in Europe – basically we have many more LNG terminals than we have LNG gas – we have made the strategic decision to continue to invest in LNG in Germany, too, in view of the predicted increase in gas consumption and LNG production particularly also in the United States of America. As we are phasing out nuclear energy as well as lignite and black coal, Germany will be a very safe market as far as natural gas is concerned, regardless of who is selling it.
 
Then we have the issue of Iran, which is currently a source of contention. We need to be very careful with regard to this division, which concerns me greatly. In a speech to the Knesset, I expressed my assurance that Israel’s right to exist is a fundamental guiding principle of Germany. And I mean exactly what I said. I am observing the ballistic missile programme, I am observing Iran in Yemen and above all I am observing Iran in Syria. The only question that divides us, the United States and the Europeans, on this issue, is: Does it serve our common cause, our common goal of reducing the harmful and difficult influence of Iran by terminating the only agreement still in force, or would we help our cause more by keeping hold of the small anchor we have in order to perhaps be able to exert pressure in other areas? That is the tactical issue over which we do not see eye to eye. But our goals are, of course, the same.
 
But I’ll also ask, as I am on the receiving end of criticism every day myself: Is it good for the Americans to want to pull out of Syria immediately and quickly, or is that not also a way to strengthen the opportunities for Iran and Russia to gain influence there? We need to talk about that, too. Those are issues that are on the table and that we need to discuss.
 
There is, of course, also the question of how economic relations between China, the United States and Europe should develop. That is a huge problem. We are observing that China is an up and coming country. When I visit China, its representatives say: for 1700 of the two thousand years A.D., we were the leading economy. Don’t get upset, all that’s going to happen is that we will return to the place where we always were. It’s just that you haven’t experienced it in the past 300 years. And we say: in the past 300 years we were the leaders, first the Europeans, then the United States, and then all of us together. Now, however, we need to deal with the situation as it is and find sensible solutions so that it doesn’t descend into a struggle that weakens all sides.
 
In this context I want to say quite clearly that I support all efforts to promote fairness and trade. I am talking about reciprocity. We need to talk about that. We need to do so in a spirit of partnership and in view of the fact that we have so many other problems to resolve in the world that it would be helpful if we could reach an understanding. I place great hope in the negotiations that are now being conducted with the United States of America in the area of trade.
 
I will say quite frankly that if we are serious about the transatlantic partnership, for me as German Chancellor it is a little disturbing to say the least to read that apparently – I haven’t yet seen it in writing – the US Department of Commerce has said that European cars are a threat to the national security of the United States of America. You see, we are proud of our cars, and we are entitled to be so. These vehicles are also built in the United States. The largest BMW factory is in South Carolina, not in Bavaria, in South Carolina. South Carolina in turn exports to China. If these vehicles, which are no less of a threat by being built in South Carolina than they would be by being built in Bavaria, suddenly pose a threat to US national security, then this comes as a shock to us. In that case, I can only say that I think it would be good for us to engage in proper talks. Whenever anyone has a grievance, we need to talk about it – that is how things work in the world. And then we will be able to find solutions.
 
Ladies and gentlemen, all these issues that are coming at us like puzzle pieces and which are too many for me to refer to here, are ultimately the expression of a fundamental question. Because we are noticing how great the pressure is on our traditional and, to us, familiar order, this raises the question of whether we are going to break up into a lot of individual puzzle pieces and think that each of us can best solve the problem single-handedly. As German Chancellor, I can only respond: if so, our chances are poor. For the United States of America has so much more economic clout and the dollar as a currency is so much stronger, that I can only say: obviously it holds the better hand. China, with more than 1.3 billion people, is so much larger. We can be as hard-working, as impressive, as super as we like – but with a population of 80 million we won’t be able to keep up if China decides that it no longer wants to maintain good relations with Germany. That’s how it will be all over the world.
 
So the one big question is this: Are we going to stay with the principle of multilateralism, which was the lesson we learned from the Second World War and the National Socialism caused by Germany, even when multilateralism is not always fun, but often difficult, slow, complicated? I am firmly convinced that it is better to put ourselves in one another’s shoes, to look beyond our own interests and to see whether we can achieve win-win solutions together rather than to think we can solve everything ourselves.
 
That is why, ladies and gentlemen, I was so pleased yesterday evening when I was preparing my speech and read a quotation by Lindsey Graham, who declared yesterday evening: “Multilateralism may be complicated, but it’s better than staying at home alone.” I think that is the right response to the motto of this conference “The Great Puzzle: Who Will Pick Up the Pieces?”: Only all of us together.
 
Thank you very much.
Madam Chairwoman, Prime Minister, Distinguished Commissioners, especially Commissioner Chergui, Ambassadors, Ladies and gentlemen,
I’m delighted to be here with you and to welcome the representatives of the 54 member states of the African Union as well as the Commissioners present today.
The partnership between Africa and Germany is based on shared interests, but above all on countless contacts – at state level, as well as between our civil societies, our companies, the churches and church organisations. Our cooperation is marked by joint efforts for sustainable economic development, for education, for good governance, for peace and security.
We see from this building today that our partnership is taking form in a very literal sense. I’m pleased that we’re opening this new African Union Commission building together: the Julius Nyerere Building for Peace and Security. Its architecture combines local traditions with German technology. It thus epitomises the long-standing and stable relations between the African Union and the Federal Republic of Germany.
The African Union operates both within and in the wider world. Since its establishment, it has worked to foster solidarity and cohesion among African states and peoples. Julius Nyerere personifies this goal. Furthermore, the African Union ensures that the interests of the entire continent are heard and taken into account at international level.
There are many good reasons for this. For in the light of ever greater globalisation and the interconnectedness of our world, an increasing number of states are faced with the same challenges. Both good and bad developments are often not limited to individual countries but, rather, have an impact on neighbouring countries, as well as beyond a single region or continent. Take, for example, the financial and economic crisis, epidemics such as Ebola, terrorist activities or refugee movements and displacement. An international community is much better placed to tackle such challenges than an individual state on its own. I therefore firmly believe that global issues require global answers.
Africa, the continent you represent, is increasingly gaining global significance. It’s therefore important that the African states represent their common interests with the greatest possible unity – with a recognised point of contact such as the African Union.
Ms Zuma, it’s sometimes difficult to find unity. I don’t think I’m giving away any secrets when I say that this has been our experience in the European Union, even though we have only 28 and not 54 member states. The readiness and capability to find and agree on compromises is and will remain vital: compromises in which the interests of individual countries are subordinate and yet reflected and which, taken together, represent the will of an entire continent.
The decisions we have to make are based on fundamental values such as human rights, political and economic participation as well as good governance. Human dignity is indivisible. Our main priority must be to uphold this maxim in our policies. If human dignity is violated – no matter where – then we all have a duty to act.
In his speech to the African Union in 2004, former President of the Federal Republic of Germany Horst Köhler found an apt description for the African Union. He spoke of the acceptance of the unique character of different parts of the world. He said that it was not acceptable “that anyone should invoke this special character to justify or give free rein to oppression and abuses directed against their fellow citizens.” Horst Köhler spoke back then of a “duty as citizens of the world” to draw attention to such things. That applies to every continent and to every country. We are all called upon not to simply accept intolerable conditions but to express our determination to try and change them.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is a very good example of this. Germany campaigned hard for its adoption. The fact that this Agenda was adopted by all member states of the United Nations last year and that it is not only an agenda for the developing countries, for emerging economies or for highly developed countries but, rather, an agenda for everyone shows that its importance should not be underestimated.
The Federal Republic of Germany’s desire to live up to its international responsibility is evident from many examples. For instance, we’re applying for a non-permanent seat in the UN Security Council in 2019 and 2020 so that we can once again shoulder responsibility.
The African Union is also driven by the will for change. This new building thus symbolises a shared goal: more peace and more security in Africa. For this is the key prerequisite for a life in dignity. This modern building provides the African Peace and Security Architecture with more room – both literally and figuratively.
The African Union Commission has made closer security cooperation a priority, improved structures and built up considerable capacities. At the African Union Summit in Kigali, you looked at sustainable financing and made a key decision on greater self-financing. This is of prime importance for the African Union’s continued ability to act. The African Union and its regional organisations have demonstrated in many different ways the importance of the ability to act. It has already been possible to prevent some major outbreaks of violence through rapid reaction and mediation. This responsibility in action saves lives and opens up new prospects.
For instance, mediators and peacemakers are endeavouring to prevent genocide and civil wars from recurring in the Great Lakes Region. I have to admit that we’re deeply concerned about the situation in Burundi. We can see there’s a danger that the old conflict could flare up again. However, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union and the East African Community are doing everything in their power to prevent this.
In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the aim is to enable free elections to take place. Ten years ago, German soldiers were among those who ensured that the presidential elections went off peacefully. Now, however, we’re concerned that much of what was built up over the last few years could collapse. I’d therefore like to call on the political leaders in Kinshasa, in the interest of the entire population, to uphold the constitution and save the Congo from plunging into a profound crisis.
The situation in the Central African Republic gives cause for optimism. Thanks to a successful democratic transition, there is now hope of political stability and an economic upswing. Such developments are also crucial when it comes to destroying the breeding ground for terrorist militia. For they attempt to capitalise on instability, discontent and a lack of prospects. Often their influence stretches beyond national borders. It’s therefore all the more important that the African Union and regional associations of affected states take action against terrorist organisations which have no respect for human life.
The African Union’s engagement in Somalia is especially impressive. AMISOM is its largest military mission. The fact that free elections can take place in Somalia soon despite difficult circumstances would be a crucial milestone. We hope this can be achieved.
Ultimately, stable state structures are required to eliminate lawless zones and safe havens for terrorists. Special attention therefore also has to be paid to developments around Lake Chad. This region has not only been hard hit by climate change, droughts and overexploitation but has also suffered devastation at the hands of extremists. Thousands of people have already fallen victim to the brutal campaign waged by Boko Haram. Millions have fled – within their own country or to neighbouring countries. The scale of this humanitarian disaster is difficult to comprehend. But at least a multinational force has already achieved some important successes in the fight against the terrorists. For example, they were able to free 700 kidnapped women and children. However, it is absolutely vital that this operation continues. The European Union will provide assistance amounting to 50 million euros.
The peacekeeping mission in Mali is also bolstered by joint engagement. Germany is providing support there with its own contribution. Up to 650 German soldiers are involved in MINUSMA. Ensuring the stability of Mali is crucially important for development throughout West Africa.
A look at the continent shows where the collapse of state structures can all too quickly lead. Libya is a sad example of this. It is now all the more crucial that we do everything in our power to stabilise Libya. I expressly support the African Union’s efforts to use its influence in this area to help resolve the conflict. Perhaps in the past we didn’t talk to you about it enough; that is something I am critically telling myself. The UN led peace process is geared towards the prospect of an inclusive Government of National Accord in Libya. Such a government would then be our point of contact for curbing illegal migration.
We cannot and must not tolerate human traffickers putting the lives of others on the line. Human trafficking has to stop. Far too many people have already drowned in the Mediterranean. It is often young people in particular who embark on the journey to Europe with totally false perceptions. They are prepared to put their lives at risk without knowing what awaits them or whether they will even be allowed to stay. On their journey they are often treated very badly. Yesterday I was able to talk to some of these young people at the International Organization for Migration in the Niger. It was very sobering to hear what these young people have already had to endure.
Yet we also see that the majority of people who flee their homes remain in Africa. It is impressive to see that states with major development problems themselves are taking in refugees. I would like to take this opportunity to thank Ethiopia, for example – and the Ethiopian Prime Minister is here today – for taking in around 700,000 refugees.
Germany is funding comprehensive humanitarian and development projects to support people in need and minimise the causes of migration. Our focus is on countries of origin as well as transit and host countries.
The EU-Africa Summit in Malta, where we adopted the Valletta Action Plan, was an important step in this direction. To implement this Plan, the European Union has set up an emergency trust fund with 1.8 billion euros. I know that your countries are now rightly calling for the swift implementation of this Valletta agenda. And rapid implementation is of the essence, as the suffering people urgently need help.
One important tool is migration partnerships with African states. Germany, together with France and Italy, is active particularly in Mali and the Niger.
However, the best way to combat migration and the threat of terrorism is sustainable economic development. Africa has considerable economic potential. Africa has many natural resources. And Africa has a growing middle class in many countries. Yet Africa also has a rapidly growing population. Africa’s population is young, and harbours many hopes. The country of which I am Chancellor has an average age of around 45 years. In contrast, the average age in African countries is between 15 and 19 years. So on the one hand you can see how much hope this continent contains, and on the other hand how much disappointment can ensue if together we don’t manage to convert these hopes into reality.
I therefore discern three key tasks. First: we need to strengthen private investment in Africa in order to create sustainable growth and jobs. For this we need an appropriate framework and fair trading conditions. Second: advances must be made in developing infrastructure – in the areas of transport, communication and energy. We can now point to successful experiences in the area of renewable energy sources. In view of the number of people on the African continent who still have no access to electricity, particularly in rural areas, we are, of course, aware that it is very difficult to develop the economy in these regions. That is why infrastructure is so crucial. Third: we need better vocational training that is more closely oriented to the labour market, thus increasing job prospects.
In 2017 Germany will assume the Presidency of the Group of 20. We will make the issues that concern you in Africa one of the priorities of the G20 agenda and also launch a large scale initiative with Africa to this end. A conference due to take place half way through the year in Berlin will play a particularly important role, featuring high ranking representatives from G20 states and African countries as well as from international organisations and the private sector. Before that our German African Business Summit is planned – this time in Nairobi. Many German enterprises already operate in Africa, but considerably more could do so. That is something that I and our entire Government are working to encourage.
The African Union is also the driving force behind economic integration on the continent. It is good to know that in this respect, too, the AU is a key partner for the European Union. Africa is a continent with a future. Now, in the present, we need to do the groundwork to ensure that the future of this continent is indeed a good one – and that is the responsibility of many people, including us, the countries of Europe. Germany and the European Union are happy to support you in this process. We stand alongside you but in a way that does not dictate how you should go about things. Rather, we want to be partners, who, incidentally, still have a lot to learn about your history, your culture and your motivation. Our knowledge of Africa in Europe is not adequate, that is true at least for me as Germany’s Chancellor and for many other people in Germany.
We need to understand that Africa’s wellbeing is in the interests of Germany and in the interests of Europe. We want to cooperate in this spirit – here in this building, too, if we are invited back. Be that as it may, this building is now at your disposal. My hope is that it will play a key role in ensuring that peace, reconciliation and security can become even more of a reality for the people in Africa than is the case today.
I wish you, Ms Zuma, all the very best for your work, and all the very best to the Commissioners and all of you who bear responsibility for peace and security. Make sure you work well together. Strive for compromise in the African Union. You could serve as a role model for the European Union if we hear that you’ve managed to resolve complicated problems quicker than we have. We could even have a competition.
Thank you very much.
Secretary-General, António Guterres, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen, Svenja Schulze,
Allow me to offer you a very warm welcome. I’m delighted to be part of the Petersberg Climate Dialogue once again this year. 2020 was supposed to be the year of biodiversity and climate protection. Right now, however, we’re witnessing each day how profoundly the COVID-19 pandemic is changing the way in which we live and work together. Yet – this is what I firmly believe – we mustn’t lose sight of the fact that we continue to face other major challenges for humanity. 2020 must therefore, despite everything, be the year of biodiversity and climate protection.
In order to ensure that this is successful, it’s vitally important to continue the Petersberg Climate Dialogue particularly now. I would like to thank all those involved – especially those from the UK – that we are able to hold this climate dialogue under these unique circumstances. The next UN Climate Conference – COP26 – will, after all, take place under the auspices of the UK Presidency.
The COVID-19 pandemic is reminding us once again – albeit in a particularly painful way – of how vital international cooperation is. In our closely interconnected world, the national good always depends on the global good at the end of the day. Whether the coronavirus crisis, or the economic, financial or climate crisis – in all great challenges, the more we act together, the better we are able to avoid or mitigate human suffering and economic upheaval.
Ladies and gentlemen, we have seen a reduction in emissions harmful to the climate in most recent times. But, of course, we mustn’t allow ourselves to be deceived as this is essentially due to the shutdown of our public and economic lives. It therefore continues to be our task and we continue to have a responsibility to implement the Paris Climate Agreement with all due seriousness and determination. We continue to be called upon to improve national contributions by 2030, to develop long-term strategies for the period up to 2050 and to come up with a concept for climate financing to this end.
The European Commission has shown us the way with its Green Deal, in the course of which Europe is to become the first climate-neutral continent by 2050. We know that the path to get there is long. I therefore welcome the proposed interim target of reducing emissions in the European Union to 50 to 55 percent by 2030 compared with 1990 levels. We need a comprehensive package of measures to this end. This includes investments in climate-friendly infrastructures and also appropriate carbon pricing.
I welcome the planned extension of EU emissions trading to other sectors. In Germany, we decided last year to introduce carbon pricing also in the fields of transport and heating. We are thereby increasing incentives for both companies and private households alike to make investments in order to reduce CO2 emissions and therefore CO2 costs in the future.
Germany will phase out coal-based power generation by 2038. This will entail truly far-reaching structural change for certain regions in Germany. We will invest particularly heavily in these regions in order to have climate protection create new economic prospects and therefore jobs for people.
We will continue to promote the expansion of renewable energies. The aim is for renewable energies to account for 65 percent of the total by 2030.
We don’t just want to think of ourselves, but also to drive forward international cooperation. We are setting aside four billion euros for international climate financing this year, which means that we have doubled our commitment since 2014. We have already increased our contribution to the Green Climate Fund to 1.5 billion euros. And also after 2020, Germany will do its part to support international climate financing in line with the Paris Climate Agreement.
Let me say once again that we face difficult discussions about distribution with a view to our respective national budgets if we consider the economic damage that the COVID-19 pandemic has caused. It will therefore be all the more important, when launching economic stimulus packages, that we keep climate protection very firmly in view and make it clear that we’re not cutting back on climate protection, but rather that we’re investing in sustainable technologies – that we’re not only thinking of ourselves in national terms, but that we’re continuing to make robust progress as regards our international obligations because this is essential to ensuring that we meet with success in climate protection at the global level.
In order to do justice to the joint Paris Climate Agreement, everyone in the international community must do their part, of course. We must move away from fossil fuels and towards renewable energies and greater energy efficiency. We believe and I believe that market economy incentives are most important in this regard and that we need carbon pricing. It would be wonderful if as many of the world’s countries as possible could take this approach. After all, carbon pricing is the most efficient way to reduce emissions. And participation across the board helps, of course, to prevent market distortions that could emerge if only individual countries sign up to such a system.
Overall, it’s important for investors to be able to see that investing in modern technologies pays off. This applies not least to renewable energies. The wind and sun are available everywhere as sources of energy. However, it’s often the case that they’re unfeasible owing to capital costs. We therefore need a financial market that makes cheap capital available for climate-friendly investments. As many stakeholders as possible should work together in this context – countries, development banks, and also the private financial sector.
Economy and ecology must be thought of as two sides of the same coin. And it goes without saying that we must also do this with a view to biodiversity. We know that natural habitats are shrinking. This is having a severe impact on biodiversity, and is also posing a threat for us humans in turn. Allow me to mention one example: according to scientists, 60 percent of all infectious diseases in recent decades have been transmitted from animals to humans. This is due to the increased exploitation of hitherto undisturbed habitats and the resulting proximity to wild animals.
We therefore have no alternative but to make progress in the international protection of biodiversity and forests. We need a new framework for the protection of biodiversity in the run-up to the 15th UN conference to implement the Convention on Biological Diversity.
Ladies and gentlemen, the 17 Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda – which include healthcare and climate protection – make it clear that there can be no sustainable development at the expense of individual SDGs, but that we must bear all of them in mind at all times. Like all of the SDGs of the 2030 Agenda, we can only successfully overcome the challenge of climate protection at the end of the day by taking firm action at the national level and by working together at the international level. I would like to ask all of you for your support, and I hope that this conference will show the world that climate protection and biodiversity are, particularly at this time of worldwide crisis during the pandemic, of paramount importance. I would like to thank everyone involved in this endeavour. It has been a privilege to speak to you today. Thank you very much.
Annika Lindblom,
Ladies and gentlemen,
We are currently facing particular challenges both internationally and nationally. At the heart of these are our common efforts to overcome the COVID‑19 pandemic and its wide‑ranging impacts. In Europe, COVID‑19 has already claimed more than 200,000 lives. Our economy finds itself in an extremely difficult situation. A large number of jobs have been lost, and the pandemic will continue to make itself felt in our lives and work for the foreseeable future. We are witnessing this again in almost all of Europe’s countries at the moment. However, we must not lose sight of other important issues. With this in mind, sustainability in general and climate and environmental protection in particular are and remain the major tasks of our age.
The Heads of State and Government met for a sustainable development summit in New York in September of last year. The stock‑taking that we did four years after the adoption of the 2030 Agenda yielded sobering results. Unfortunately, these findings, which were for the most part negative, albeit not entirely across the board, haven’t changed today. Instead, the situation in terms of climate protection, biodiversity and social inequality has even become more serious since the adoption of the 2030 Agenda. In order to speed up its implementation, the United Nations has declared a Decade of Action, which I expressly support. The pressure to act has intensified in the face of the COVID‑19 pandemic – be it in the eradication of poverty and the promotion of food security or education, or, it goes without saying, with respect to healthcare. It will only be possible to make progress on all of these issues if we think of this as a joint project. Allow me therefore to thank the European Sustainable Development Network and the Federal Environment Ministry for hosting this conference. And I would like to thank everyone taking part in this.
How can we make progress in Europe on the path towards a climate‑neutral and sustainable continent? – The Green Deal offers us an answer to this question. It shows us how to achieve climate neutrality and greater sustainability, without – and this is very important to me – reducing our capacity for innovation or our competitiveness. On the contrary, the European Green Deal brings together environmental necessity and a robust economy. After all, protecting the natural resources is an essential prerequisite for economic success. While this may sound like a statement of the obvious, we must become much more aware of this and then actually apply this insight in our daily lives.
We Europeans therefore have a leading role to play in this regard. We must prove that economic growth can be decoupled from emissions and the consumption of resources. We must learn from the mistakes of the past. This means that European industrialised countries have to step up to the plate also in the transfer of innovations and technologies. They must play a pioneering role here. This is a form of development cooperation that reflects our responsibility for less industrialised countries. These are the countries that are suffering as a result of climate change, which can be laid at the door of industrialised countries in particular. It goes without saying that we Europeans are not solely responsible for climate protection. But close attention is being paid in many parts of the world as to how we approach our responsibility. Our example is therefore crucial to whether other countries join us in advancing solutions for carbon‑neutral growth.
This challenge hasn’t necessarily become any easier during the pandemic. We have our work cut out in fighting to curb the spread of the virus and in overcoming its economic and social impact. However, as we know, every crisis is also an opportunity; this is also true of this crisis. The COVID‑19 pandemic has the potential to sharpen our awareness of the need for greater sustainability, particularly in terms of general resilience to crises. This isn’t just about returning to pre‑crisis levels as quickly as possible, but is also about emerging from this crisis in a more sustainable and therefore more robust way, thus being better prepared for future crises. Short‑term crisis management and long‑term investments in the future – we must think of these as two sides of the same coin and bring these two aspects together.
That is why, for example, digital sovereignty, Europe’s competitiveness and a climate‑friendly innovation policy are among the priorities of Germany’s current Presidency of the Council of the European Union. Germany supports the Commission’s proposal to reduce greenhouse gases by at least 55 percent compared to 1990 levels by the end of the decade. This is highly ambitious. However, the Green Deal is a signpost that points us in the direction of a low‑carbon and therefore competitive economy. Ahead of us lies the path towards a truly comprehensive transformation that will impact climate protection, the circular economy, biodiversity, sustainable agriculture, sustainable mobility and other issues in equal measure.
This should not be underestimated. Such a comprehensive transformation entails far‑reaching structural adjustments in national economies. For all the new opportunities this promises, such change can also be painful, for example if jobs are lost in certain industries. I think I know what I’m talking about here. In Germany, for example, the intensive expansion of renewable energies may offer new job prospects in this sector, but we also want to phase out coal by 2038 at the latest. Creating alternatives when jobs or sources of income are lost involves a great deal of effort. We must not abandon the affected regions and the people there; and we’re not abandoning them.
Whether in Germany or elsewhere, mitigating the economic and social hardships of climate‑friendly structural change is a challenge that we must face. If we don’t do this, progress towards greater sustainability, which can only be achieved with broad‑based support in society, is at risk. In my view, the essential, perhaps even the most important question in the context of sustainable development, is this: how can we resolve or cushion conflicts of interest or shape processes of transformation in such a way that no one is left behind? “Leave no one behind” – that is what we pledged to do in the 2030 Agenda. The European Green Deal also takes its lead from this guiding principle. The Green Deal aspires to make this transition fair and inclusive for everyone. This is crucial for the success of sustainability “made in Europe”. It is crucial for our cohesion – within our societies and also between individual countries.
As important as the Green Deal is, we also need a framework that allows us to take a European approach to the 2030 Agenda across the board. And so I’m delighted that the European Commission has announced a concept for the comprehensive implementation of the 2030 Agenda. I look forward with great interest to the proposals, especially on issues that aren’t directly linked to the Green Deal. The concept should then be dovetailed by regular progress reports from the Commission. This would enable us to better identify the sustainability areas in which we need additional measures.
I can also only welcome the fact that strategic foresight is to play a more prominent role in EU policy in the future. This is a further point of departure for making the EU fit for the future. After all, crises can never be ruled out, and if we aren’t sufficiently prepared, they can set us back a long way on the road to achieving our sustainability goals.
Sustainability must be advanced at all levels. In Germany, we are guided in this by a Sustainability Strategy that we launched 18 years ago and which we have kept on developing since then. Since 2016, the strategy has been the framework for implementing the 2030 Agenda in Germany. For each sustainability goal, we define what exactly we want to achieve and by when. We regularly assess how far we have come in each case so that we can make adjustments in good time if necessary. With a view to further developing our strategy, we rely on broad‑based participation on the part of the business and science community and within society. Only recently, I invited the German public to have their say on the new draft strategy.
There are so many good ideas that are worth considering. We can also see this in the context of the European Sustainable Development Week, which is organised annually by the European Sustainable Development Network. The fact that, despite the COVID‑19 pandemic, almost 4000 activities have taken place in 25 countries this year shows that sustainability is not a fair‑weather issue but is dear to many people’s hearts. I find this most encouraging. After all, sustainability cannot simply be decreed or prescribed by law, but rather each and every one of us is called upon to internalise the guiding principle of sustainability. Sustainability must therefore become a matter of course in our daily lives so that we can ask ourselves in all honesty: are we consuming sustainably? Are we producing sustainably? Are we building sustainably? Is our mobility sustainable?
The European Sustainability Development Network is doing a great deal to enshrine the idea of sustainability in the public consciousness and to disseminate good ideas for sustainable action, including government action. Indeed, sustainable development can only succeed as a joint project. And we bear responsibility for this today. What the world will look like in the future and how future generations will judge us is up to us today. That is why we must not stop encouraging, informing, inspiring and also criticising each other time and again when it comes to pursuing the most sustainable way of living and working possible.
With the European Green Deal, we have an important starting point for advancing the joint project that is sustainability in Europe. As we move forward, we will have to resolve conflicts of interest time and again. We will, time and again, have to find practicable and widely acceptable solutions. This is precisely what makes the European Sustainable Development Network so valuable. All of you who contribute your knowledge and experience here will help to breathe life into the model of sustainability in Europe. With this in mind, let me wish you a successful conference. Thank you very much for your dedication.
Ladies and gentlemen, and, above all, Prof. Schwab,
You’ve just mentioned that this is my 12th appearance at this Forum. You have, for the 50th time, the pleasure of being at this event – and not just for one day –, to prepare it and bring people together. I’d like to congratulate you most sincerely on this achievement. What has been created here in the Swiss mountains is something unique.
This Forum has set itself the ambitious goal of improving the state of the world and has brought together representatives from politics, business and society time and again to this end – not only in Davos, but also in many other places around the world. I believe that we can claim, if we cast our minds back over the past five decades, that the world has indeed become a better place.
Fifty years ago, we were still in the midst of the Cold War. Germany was divided. I couldn’t imagine back then that I would one day be standing here. It’s now been 30 years since the Cold War came to an end. A multipolar world has emerged from a bipolar world that, as we were unable to tell 30 years ago, also has a large number of problems.
Per capita income has more than doubled since 1970. The number of people suffering extreme poverty has gone down, even though the world’s population has increased dramatically. We have made tremendous progress in the fight against disease – polio, for example.
None of this would ever have been possible with countries just going it alone, but for me this is the result of people, companies and, above all, countries working together. So this is important, despite the fact that new problems arise year after year, of course. If you take a look at the World Economic Forum’s Global Risks Report, you can see very clearly, because this is always highlighted in colour, how the nature of these problems has evolved. Environmental problems have essentially moved to the forefront of these issues over the last ten years. The issue of sustainability and a cohesive world are of paramount importance. Your motto this year, “Stakeholders for a Cohesive and Sustainable World”, is therefore a motto that is certainly worth discussing.
We talk a lot about the fact that the international community achieves little together. Nevertheless, it managed a few years ago to develop and adopt the Sustainable Development Goals for the year 2030. More than 180 countries accomplished this. This means that we have a very clear roadmap for this new decade as, at the end of the day, we want to achieve these SDGs. However, it was clear at the UN summit last September, which took stock of this for the first time, that we have so very much on our plate here and that we will not be able to genuinely achieve all of the Sustainable Development Goals if we continue at the current pace.
That is why I would also like to express my gratitude – Prof. Schwab mentioned this to me just now – for the fact that an agreement has been reached with the UN to set up a platform on the issue of oceans. This is the right way forward, because we need to link up global efforts so that we also have an idea of how fast we are progressing.
UN Secretary-General António Guterres is therefore right to say that ours is a “decade of action”. We must act, and we must do so, for example, in the area of biodiversity – the vast majority of countries are working on this – and, above all – and this is also playing a huge role at this year’s World Economic Forum – in the area of climate protection.
The issue of achieving the goals of the Paris Climate Agreement could be about no less than the survival of our continent. That’s why there is a need for action, because we know that we will not achieve the Paris goals – above all the objective of ensuring that global warming does not exceed 1.5 degrees – with the present commitments. I will therefore focus on what this means in the first part of my speech. This means that the world must act together – this is, after all, an international agreement. Not everyone is still on board, unfortunately, but many are part of this effort. And this also means that each country must do its own part.
If we look at Germany, the country that I’m representing here, then, after 30 years of German unity, we can say that we find ourselves in a situation in which we’re doing comparatively well. We have never had so few unemployed people. We’re spending a great deal of money on research and development. We have increased our investments. But all this doesn’t reflect what we need to achieve over the next 30 years. After all, the task of keeping global warming to less than 1.5 degrees compared with the pre industrial era means, for example, no more and no less for us in Europe than that we must be climate-neutral by 2050.
The vast majority of the countries of the European Union have committed themselves to the objective of climate neutrality. The Commission President was here yesterday and presented the Green Deal to you. Europe intends to be the first continent to be CO2 free, i.e. emissions-free. But, ladies and gentlemen, these are, of course, transformations of gigantic, historic proportions. This transformation essentially means turning our backs on our entire way of doing business and our way of life, to which we have become accustomed in the industrial age, over the next 30 years – we have already taken the first steps – and transitioning to completely new forms of value creation, which, of course, also include industrial production and which have been informed above all by the digital transformation. We must also get on top of a second giant transformation. And we hope that the transformation to a CO2 free economy will intensify thanks to the digital transformation and that the digital transformation can facilitate this development.
I would like to spend a moment telling you about what we’re doing in Germany and what impact this is having on societies. This goal of climate neutrality is easier said than done. It’s relatively easy to commit to this when you live in cities. It’s a little easier there than if you live in the country and perhaps run a farm or have to walk long distances to work or have a wind turbine on your doorstep.
Firstly, in recent years we took the decision to phase out nuclear power by 2022, albeit for other reasons of sustainability, namely because we believe that waste management for nuclear power isn’t sustainable and that the risks are too great. Secondly, we have decided to phase out coal-fired power generation by 2038 at the latest – if possible by 2035. Coal still accounts for a very high proportion of Germany’s electricity generation – around 30 percent. The phase out is therefore a huge step, especially for the people who mine lignite and who find themselves, in structural terms, in a completely new situation.
However, this is only the smaller part of the story. If we contemplate transforming the energy supply, i.e. first of all the power supply, to make it CO2 emissions-free, then that’s one task. But if we look at Germany’s primary energy consumption, we see that electricity accounts for 22 percent while 78 percent of our energy consumption is accounted for by heating, mobility and industrial production.
Let’s continue to consider the issue of electricity for a moment. We have set ourselves the target here of generating 65 percent, or around two thirds, with renewable energies by 2030. That’s quite a lot for a country where the sun doesn’t shine all that often and where the wind blows quite irregularly. This involves setting up a completely new power line network as the sources of energy production are, of course, mostly located far from where the energy is consumed. We have also set ourselves the goal of reducing CO2 emissions by a total of 55 percent by 2030 and then reaching 95 percent – which is commonly referred to as climate neutrality – by 2050.
The transition to renewable energy sources is a mammoth feat in and of itself. It’s unlikely that it will be possible to achieve a 100 percent share of renewable energies in electricity generation – we have now reached 42 percent by using resources in our own country – because our energy capacity, i.e. the efficiency with which we can generate electricity from the wind and sun, isn’t very high. There are regions in the world where this works much better.
There’s still the issue of 78 percent for industrial production, mobility and housing, however. The concept of “green hydrogen” will play a huge role here, although we approach everything with an open mind when it comes to technology. This will also give rise to completely new connectivities in the world as “green hydrogen” can be produced much more efficiently in many other places outside Europe. But we will also do this in Europe.
This means that – and that’s why I’m delighted that many industrial enterprises have told us that they want to become climate neutral – that we must reorganise our processes entirely, such as in steel production, mechanical engineering and other areas. I had a very interesting discussion just now about the possibilities offered by biotechnology. It goes without saying that this will also play a huge role in the transformation of all of our supply chains.
This means that we will experience dramatic changes without having to do without the products that we are used to today. But we’ll have to change the way we look at all of this. The conditions for this transformation must be put in place at the level of government, and companies must also be prepared to strike out on the path of innovation.
Allow me now to talk to you about Germany. We’re actually a relatively peaceful country. But there have already been considerable social conflicts between those who feel that it’s absolutely vital to set out on this path and those who do not. I want to reiterate that 2050 is 30 years away. I have clear memories of German reunification, which took place 30 years ago. You can achieve a great deal in 30 years. But I also know how short 30 years are if you want to bring about a digital transformation and a transformation of supply chains based on entirely different sources of energy.
Time is therefore of the essence. That is why we, the older generation, must also make sure – I’m 65 years old – that we embrace young people’s impatience in a positive and constructive way and understand that they have a different horizon that extends far beyond 2050. This, of course, raises the question as to how we preserve biodiversity and achieve climate compatibility in this world. This is why we’re called upon to act.
The aim now is to overcome new social conflicts. After all, there is, also in Germany, a large group of people who don’t consider the whole issue to be all that urgent. This group isn’t yet convinced that this is the most important thing at stake. How can we get such people on side? Democracies have the task of involving individuals and sparking their enthusiasm. To my mind, the greatest social tension is between cities and the country, because rural areas bear a much greater burden when faced with changes and urban areas are able to harness change for their own benefit much faster as the infrastructure in cities is superior. For example, it’s much easier to do without individual mobility in a city than in the country.
How do you conciliate those who simply don’t want to believe in climate change and who act as if it were a question of faith? To my mind, however, this is a classic instance of clear evidence in the light of scientific data. But since we’re living at a time when facts are competing with emotions, you can always try to create a post factual world through emotions, which is then just as important. This therefore means for us that we have to reconcile emotions with facts. That’s perhaps the biggest task facing society. In order to address this, it is necessary, as a minimum, to talk to each other. The irreconcilability and walls of silence that sometimes exist between those who deny climate change and those who see it and are committed to ensuring that we tackle it must be overcome.
Many people are talking to each other on this issue who otherwise rarely speak to each other, but not enough people are talking to each other. If we enter a world in which the wall of silence is perhaps sometimes even greater than it was during the Cold War, when there were fairly orderly mechanisms of exchange, then we have a problem. This is why I’m in favour, even if this isn’t easy, of engaging in dialogue – also between groups with the most controversial of opinions – because, if we don’t, we will only become prisoners of our own prejudices and inhabit our own personal bubble. This has become much easier in the digital age than it was in previous ages. This could prove to be our undoing and must be overcome.
I firmly believe that the price for not taking action would be far greater than for taking action. We want to promote innovation and research and believe that industrialised countries have an obligation here. For example, the G20 countries produce 80 percent of CO2 emissions. That means that, in view of the CO2 budget that we have already used up, we have a duty to tread innovative paths in the field of technology.
I was most delighted and, to be honest, surprised to note that Germany took first place in the 2020 Bloomberg Innovation Index. We’re not the kind of people who spend all day banging on about what works well here, because we’re mostly focused on what isn’t going so well. Cultures can be different in this respect. But when it comes to the Bloomberg ranking, then we can allow ourselves to mention this. Interestingly, this excellent result has a great deal to do with the fact that our automobile industry, which is, after all, a core sector of the German economy, is undergoing a phase of transformation with very high investments in research and development. It remains to be seen whether we’re moving fast enough. The risks are clearly pointed up in this study.
We’re focusing as far as possible on market economy mechanisms, and also on regulatory law where this is required. The biggest and most difficult area of transformation is, as things currently stand, mobility. The transition to CO2 free mobility is a huge challenge. We all know that producing batteries and electric cars doesn’t reduce CO2 emissions by itself if not all of the battery’s components are produced such that they are CO2 neutral. That means that we still have a vast amount of work to do in this area.
We want to go down the path of innovation in such a way that we ourselves make innovations available. There is, for example, a surcharge on the price of electricity. We have the highest electricity prices in Europe because we’re promoting renewable energies and reflecting these costs in the price of electricity. Each year, Germany’s citizens spend 30 billion euros on subsidies for this electricity because it isn’t yet competitive. However, this has resulted in the fact that we, in the area of technologies at any rate, have come very close to competitiveness in the wind and solar energy sector and are now able to sell and implement these technologies in developing countries because they don’t have to shoulder innovation and development costs. This is enabling countries that are poorer but which have a much lower footprint with regard to CO2 emissions to enter this new era more swiftly. Germany is now spending twice as much money as in 2014 – four billion euros per year – on investments in international climate protection.
So, ladies and gentlemen, we may ask ourselves: how are things developing outside of Europe?
In Europe, there is always more or less a foundation for prosperity. Yet – and this is something I have often talked about in Germany – it will be difficult to ensure that everyone is taken on board and that we do not leave any large, reluctant groups behind. But if we compare this with many other regions around the world, then we know how much more difficult it is to achieve progress in those places – because, at the same time, they are struggling with war and peace, as well as difficult economic conditions; and because, in places like Africa and also Asia, they must already grapple with the effects of climate change before they can begin to be sufficiently technologically equipped and use the right methods.
All around the world, people appear to be realising that the digital transformation and challenges in connection with our use of the earth’s resources are bringing dramatic change – whether we admit it or not. However, in recent years, this has also led to more and more countries looking inward. Also, tensions between the world’s regions have not exactly decreased.
That is what makes a multipolar environment so challenging – precisely because there is tension between the poles and these are constantly changing in strength. If we look at China’s GDP thirty years ago, it was much lower than Germany’s. China overtook us in 2007 – and today China’s economy is much stronger than ours. Of course, the ebb and flow of power causes uncertainty. And this, in turn, creates even more tension. We must bear this in mind and address the issues that arise.
Today – in fact, almost as I speak to you now – Holocaust commemoration events are being held in Israel, in Yad Vashem. Germany’s Federal President is there, and he will once again point to the responsibility that we bear for what we brought upon the world. He will also promise that we will do everything in our power to ensure that something like this never occurs again.
Today, we can look back on 75 years of peaceful coexistence in Europe. But that is not the case for everyone. The new year was only a few days old when we were all surprised by mounting tensions in Iran and Iraq. We were concerned, and we asked ourselves: what is this leading to, and how can we de escalate?
Germany is one of the countries that says: if we have imperfect agreements – and the nuclear agreement with Iran is certainly an imperfect agreement – then let’s not throw away something that’s not perfect before we have something that’s better. That is why we are campaigning to maintain the nuclear agreement. However, we did now trigger the dispute resolution mechanism – because of course we don’t want Iran to get the impression that it is no longer bound by anything. That would send the wrong message.
We have seen that we cannot simply disconnect from what’s going on in the world. In 2015, Germany and many other European countries took in a large number of refugees. I have said many times over – including, I believe, right here – that if you ask where mistakes were made, then the mistake in terms of security was not to take in those people who were standing on our doorstep. No, the mistake was to not have paid attention from the very beginning, to have not created conditions that enable people to stay in their home country. In a country like Syria, with just over 20 million inhabitants, half of which have fled their homes – either as internally displaced persons or by going abroad – and when you see that Turkey is hosting some four million Syrian refugees, that Lebanon has become destabilised, to a significant extent also because of the refugees it has taken in, and how Jordan is suffering under the burden it is bearing, then the only conclusion you can draw is that we must, time and again, do everything we can to set peace processes in motion, no matter how difficult this may be.
We need to make sure that what we are witnessing in Syria does not repeat itself in Libya. Last weekend, we attempted – and it’s nothing more than that – to find a solution for Libya, before the conflict there becomes a proxy war similar to the one people in Syria are burdened with. With regard to Libya, we are witnessing how the adjacent countries in the Sahel region, which are among the poorest in the world – the people of Mali and Niger, at least most of them, cannot dream of ever travelling to Davos – are now being plagued by terrorism, because Libya is an unstable state and many weapons are pouring in from there. We all must make a joint effort – and Germany is both trying to do its part and must do more – to prevent these countries from becoming completely destabilised. All development efforts and aid run the risk of becoming ineffective if a country like Niger must already now spend 30 percent of its overall income on its own security – in Germany, our discussion is centred on spending a mere two percent on defence – 30 percent of an already very small budget are being spent for this purpose; and even that’s not enough. The terrorists are still better equipped.
So of course my hope for these countries, when they ask for help, is that we will fight terrorism there the same way we do on our doorstep – namely, with a broad coalition that also gets support from the United Nations, with a robust mandate. After all, they are willing to fight for their countries. Yet so far, we haven’t managed to also get them the backing of the United Nations.
If we look at the significance that Syria took on for us in Europe, that means we need to make an even greater preventive effort and be a force for good – so that we can either prevent migration flows or succeed in promoting orderly migration. This is why I am pleased to announce today that we will continue to participate in international aid efforts – including the Gavi vaccine alliance. Between now and 2025, we will again make available 600 million euros towards fighting diseases, improving medical systems and thereby also promoting stability. At the same time, however, we must of course guarantee security. Because, without security, there can be no development. And without development, there can certainly be no security.
Ladies and gentlemen, Germany is part of the European Union; and, as Mr Schwab has pointed out, we will hold the Presidency of the Council of the European Union during the second half of this year. The European Union will undergo substantial change on 31 January. Until now, countries always joined the organisation. Luckily, there are still a few that wish to join. But now one country will be leaving us: the United Kingdom. This means profound change, but we will come to terms with it. It was the will of the British people. We will continue to do everything we can to maintain good, intensive, friendly and good neighbourly relations with the United Kingdom.
Europe – and this is in line with Ursula von der Leyen and her new Commission’s goal of being a geopolitical Commission – must certainly speak with a loud, clear voice. I think the declared aim of becoming the first CO2 neutral continent is also a good message for the world. It is equally important to do more in the sphere of development policy and to contribute more to peaceful solutions in this world.
During its Presidency, Germany wants to contribute two things in particular that I want to mention here today. First, there will be a summit with African countries, which we will hold in Brussels and at which we will above all address Africa’s agenda. I am very pleased that we will not only be doing things for Africa, but increasingly doing things with Africa. Africa has set itself a development agenda. Last summer, Africa established a free trade zone. What is more, the African Union has held a summit in Niamey, the capital of Niger – which is the poorest country in the world. A decision was taken to jointly establish a single market. This will certainly take some time to accomplish, but it is a brave decision.
We should support the Africans in what they envision for their continent, and help them turn this into reality. What we should not do is keep offering up ideas on what their development should look like. We should finally understand that being partners on an equal footing with Africa is not only charitable, but can also be mutually enriching.
In Germany, the average age is roughly 45 years – whereas in Niger and Mali it is 15 to 16 years. What does it mean when such a large part of the population is focused on the future? In Germany, we’ve gotten used to the idea that general progress can be slow, and that there is still enough time. In other countries, people are under quite a lot more time pressure. That’s why I say that Europeans only stand to benefit if they focus a little more on Africa and learn from the creativity, motivation and lust for life that people there have, under considerably more difficult circumstances.
Second, we will do something that certainly won’t be easy: So far, the European Union has not had a uniform policy on China. For years, everyone saw China as an interesting trading partner. At some point, Central and Eastern European countries formed a group and concluded that, if France, Germany and other big countries are constantly meeting with China and striking big deals, then why don’t we, too, join forces and have regular meetings with China? For the very first time, we want to have an EU China Summit that includes all 27 member states and that will be held in September in Leipzig, Germany. At this event, we want to focus on three main issues. Since 2013, we have been working on an EU China investment agreement. I can only hope that we will succeed in concluding it in 2020. But it’s not certain that we will manage to do that. It will require flexibility on all sides. We will talk about how we can jointly tackle climate change. This is a tremendous opportunity for us, because China, too, is introducing an emissions trading system – that is, market-based mechanisms. If we could interlink the European emissions trading system with that of China, we would have covered a very large part of the world, and this could serve as an example. We also want to examine relations with third countries. Here, the focus is once again on Africa, because China is very active in Africa. We want to step up our engagement, and we hope that we can maybe find common benchmarks that will help the respective countries develop their own economies.
We will, of course, also address a number of European issues. We have a Digital Agenda. Just now, during my meeting on the nexus between biotechnology and the digital revolution, I heard again what I’ve heard so many times before: Europe is good, especially on how it handles data – but Europe is far too slow. We must overcome this sluggishness – because if we don’t, we will not become a geopolitical player; we know this is true. However, with 27 member states, that’s not so easy, because each country has a parliament that instructs its Government to pursue certain objectives in Brussels. But we have no reasonable alternative. And that is why we want to help move things forward.
As Europeans – and Germany is certainly one of the lead countries on this – we will also work to promote multilateralism and to strengthen multilateral organisations. Of course, everyone is free to conclude trade agreements with anyone they wish; the European Union does just that. Hopefully, we will manage to reach a trade agreement with the United States. But on the whole, I think the most efficient way to create global prosperity is to have well-functioning multilateral organisations. These include, for example, the World Trade Organization. It must be reformed – and on this I agree with the American President – but it must also again become a functioning organisation. The fact that we currently have no workable dispute settlement procedure is basically a sign that the organisation is not functioning well.
I will therefore close by repeating the motto under which you are gathering here and now: “Stakeholders for a Cohesive and Sustainable World.” That’s all of us. It includes states and politicians. We should take this task seriously. I think we have opportunities. However, if we feel like we’re faced with too many problems, we must not turn increasingly inward. That would be the completely wrong lesson to draw 75 years after the end of the Second World War. Now I know that simply repeating the same messages over and over again will not make them more convincing. But in my view, this is a good cause to fight for, even though it may be difficult at times. I know that many among you are fighting to achieve the same goal.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak to you.
Prime Minister, Director, Excellencies, Above all, survivors, Ladies and gentlemen,
To stand here today and address you as Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany is far from easy. I am filled with a deep shame at the barbaric crimes committed here by Germans, crimes that defy all comprehension. One ought actually to fall silent in horror at what was done to women, men and children here in this place. Because what words could adequately express the grief? The grief over all those many people who were humiliated, tortured and murdered here? And yet, hard as it is in this place, more representative than any of the worst crime against humanity, silence must not be our only response. This site obliges us to keep the memory alive. We must remember the crimes that were committed here and name them clearly.
Auschwitz. This name stands for the millions of European Jews who were murdered, for the betrayal of all civilised values that was the Shoah. Auschwitz stands too for the genocide of Europe’s Sinti and Roma, for the suffering and murder of political prisoners and members of Poland’s intelligentsia, of resistance fighters, prisoners of war from the Soviet Union and other countries, homosexuals, people with disabilities and countless other people from all over Europe. The suffering of the people in Auschwitz, their deaths in the gas chambers, hunger, cold, epidemics, agonising pseudo-medical experiments, forced labour to the point of utter exhaustion – what happened here is beyond human comprehension.
At least 1.1 million people, the majority of them Jews, were methodically and ruthlessly systematically murdered in the Auschwitz camp complex alone. Every one of those people had a name, an inalienable dignity, a history, a story. The very manner of deporting them here, crowded into cattle wagons, the procedures on arrival and the so-called selection on the ramp – all were designed to dehumanise them, to rob them of their dignity and their individuality.
This site is inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List with the official name “Auschwitz-Birkenau – German Nazi Concentration and Extermination Camp (1940-1945)”. It is important that this is its full name. Oświęcim is in Poland, but in October 1939 Auschwitz was annexed as part of the German Reich. Auschwitz was a German extermination camp, operated by Germans. It is important to me to emphasise that fact. It is important to identify the perpetrators clearly. We Germans owe that to the victims, and to ourselves.
Remembering the crimes, naming the perpetrators and commemorating the victims in dignity is an unending responsibility. It is non-negotiable, and it belongs inseparably to our country. Being aware of this responsibility is an integral part of our national identity and defines who we are as an enlightened and liberal society, a democracy and a state based on the rule of law.
Today Jewish life is again flourishing in Germany. We enjoy wide-ranging friendly relations with Israel. That is by no means something we can take for granted. It is a precious gift. It is, indeed, something of a miracle. But it cannot undo what has been done. It cannot bring back the murdered Jews. There will always be a gaping void in our society.
The Basic Law of the Federal Republic of Germany entered into force 70 years ago. It took on board the lessons learnt from the horrors of the past. However, we also know that while the inalienable dignity of the individual, freedom, democracy and the rule of law are precious values, they are also vulnerable. That is why we must consolidate and enhance, protect and defend these fundamental values – both in our day-to-day coexistence and in government activity and political discourse.
These days, this is not mere rhetoric. These days, it is necessary to say this clearly. Because we are experiencing worrying racism, increasing intolerance and a wave of hate crimes. We are seeing an attack on the fundamental values of liberal democracy and a dangerous historical revisionism stoking forms of hostility directed at specific groups. We pay particular attention to antisemitism, which threatens Jewish life in Germany, Europe and beyond.
And so we need to state this more clearly: we will not tolerate antisemitism. Everyone must be able to feel safe and at home in Germany, in Europe. Auschwitz in particular serves as a warning and obliges each and every one of us to be alert every day, to preserve humanity and to protect our neighbour’s dignity.
Because, as Primo Levi, who was born in Turin 100 years ago and who survived Auschwitz as a forced labourer in Monowitz, later wrote: “It happened, therefore it can happen again.” So we cannot close our eyes and ears when people are being verbally abused, humiliated or marginalised. We must confront those who stir up prejudice and incite hatred against people of different faiths or origins.
We all of us bear responsibility. And that responsibility includes remembrance. We must never forget. No line can ever be drawn under this past, nor can it ever be downplayed.
Or in the words of Noach Flug, an Auschwitz survivor and former President of the International Auschwitz Committee: “Memory [...] is like water: it is essential to life and it finds its own way to new spaces and to different people. [...] It has no expiry date, and you cannot decree that it has been dealt with or brought to a conclusion.”
Thanks in particular to the many testimonies of survivors, this memory which is essential to life, seeks – as Noach Flug said – and indeed finds ways. I am therefore very pleased to greet some of them here today. Over the years, you have talked about the suffering you endured many times, and you have told us again today. Who can imagine how much strength it takes to live through these painful experiences time and again or even to return to this place? You share your story so that young people can learn from it. You summon up the courage and strength to foster reconciliation. You have truly shown human greatness. I am very grateful that we can hear and learn from you.
We will soon be marking the 75th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz. Ever fewer individuals can tell their story from this time. This prompted the author Navid Kermani to very aptly say: “[...] In order to ensure that a memory connected to the memorials, Stolpersteine (stumbling stones) and commemorative ceremonies is etched in our hearts, it will be even more important for future generations to see with their own eyes the places where Germany crushed human dignity, to travel to those countries which it drenched in blood.”
In many places, the perpetrators tried to cover their tracks – be it in extermination camps such as Bełżec, Sobibór and Treblinka, be it in places such as Maly Trostenets, Babi Yar or in the thousands of other places around Europe where Jews, Sinti and Roma, many others and even whole villages were murdered.
Here in Auschwitz, however, the SS and their henchmen did not manage to wipe out all traces of what they had done. This place bears witness to what happened. And this must be preserved. Anyone who comes to Auschwitz and sees the watchtowers and the barbed wire, the barracks and the cells, the remains of the gas chambers and the crematoriums, will never be able to forget it. It will, as Kermani wrote, “be etched in their hearts”.
Ten years ago, the former Polish Foreign Minister Władysław Bartoszewski, who was himself a political prisoner in Auschwitz, initiated the Auschwitz-Birkenau Foundation.
Mr Cywínski, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to you and to everyone in the Foundation who have made it their mission to conserve this place as a memorial and documentation centre. I would also like to thank everyone involved in the restoration and conservation projects. You have been working with great dedication to ensure that this place continues to bear witness. Brick barracks have been restored to secure their long-term conservation, excavations have been carried out, supporting walls installed, protective tents put up, the stolen clothes and belongings of the victims restored and conserved.
The Foundation capital will have to be substantially increased in order to fund the conservation plans for the next 25 years. Germany will make a significant contribution. This was decided yesterday together with the Minister-Presidents of the Länder.
Thanks to the Foundation, as well as the many international guides, this memorial is a place of learning, of remembrance and of awareness – a place which so impressively conveys the message: “Never again”. For that I am profoundly grateful.
However, nothing can bring back the people who were murdered here. Nothing can reverse the crimes committed here, crimes that are without parallel. They are and will remain part of German history. This history must be told, time and again, so that we remain vigilant, so that such crimes are not repeated, not even on a lesser scale, so that we can take resolute action against racism and antisemitism in all their abhorrent forms. This history has to be told so that today and in the future we can protect the dignity of every individual and so that we honour the memory of the victims.
We remember the people who were deported to Auschwitz from many different countries across Europe. At this site, we remember in particular the many Polish victims, including political prisoners, for whom Auschwitz concentration camp was originally built. We remember the six million murdered Jews and here in particular the around one million Jews who were murdered in Auschwitz-Birkenau. We remember the Sinti and Roma who were deported, tormented and murdered. We remember the victims of mass shootings. We remember those who were deported to ghettos, remained in hiding while fearing for their lives and those who had to flee their homes. We remember all those who lost everything: their friends and families, their countries and their homes, their hopes and plans, their trust, their zest for life and their dignity. We remember those who wandered around for years after the war and those who had to remain in camps for displaced persons.
Those who survived were severely affected by the horrors they had experienced. Margot Friedländer wrote in her memoir that they first of all had to learn again that they were human beings, human beings with a name.
Many asked themselves why they had survived. Why not their little sister? Why not their best friend? Why not their own mother or their husband? Many of them only learned later, or not at all, how and where their loved ones had been murdered. Such wounds never heal.
I would thus like to express my heartfelt thanks to those who have managed to talk about their experiences, to share their memories and their pain and to foster reconciliation. I bow my head before these individuals. I bow my head before the victims of the Shoah. I bow my head before their families.
Thank you very much for inviting me to be here today.
Mr Ischinger, Esteemed colleagues, Distinguished participants of this year’s Munich Security Conference,
The Internationale Wehrkundetagung in 1963 marked the start of an annual free and frank discussion – an event that has had a significant impact each year and remains a forum for discussion on a wide range of topics in the form of the Munich Security Conference. People from 125 countries are attending this year’s event. And as Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, I would like to welcome them all warmly to Munich. The Minister President of Bavaria will of course also welcome the guests because Bavaria is something very special in Germany, but as Federal Chancellor, I also wish to do so.
Until 1990, this conference was dominated by the Cold War and the uncompromising confrontation between two blocs, as well as by nuclear deterrence. Thanks to the western partners’ cohesion and strength, we were able to experience the end of the Cold War and the achievement of the goals of values based cooperation, particularly those of transatlantic cooperation, in 1990.
This is why I would like to bid a very warm welcome once again to the delegation of the United States of America, and of course especially to the Vice President and to all those who have travelled from the United States. A very warm welcome to you!
Since then, the world has changed dramatically. Today, over a quarter of a century later, we no longer have two blocs. There is a new type of order. There is a new balance of power. The structure has become far more multilateral, but we still have a super power – the United States of America – and we still have a transatlantic link. We have a united Europe with 28 members. We have seen the rise of emerging economies, particularly in Asia.
To spell this out even more clearly, I looked at how gross world product has developed when I was preparing for this conference. We can say that it more or less tripled in the 25 years between 1990 and 2015. The United States’ GDP has also tripled. The European Union’s GDP has only doubled as regards the 28 Member States. China’s GDP has increased 28 fold. This means the EU now has a share of 22 percent of gross world product compared with its previous share of 31 percent. The United States of America has been able to maintain its share of one quarter, with a slight decrease from 26 to 25 percent. And China’s share has increased from two to 15 percent. That is an example of the shifts we are witnessing.
We are facing asymmetrical threats, particularly that of Islamist terrorism, starting on 11 September 2001. There are new conflicts as a result of civil wars, population growth and climate change. There is growing interdependence as a result of globalisation and the spread of digital technology. This means we do not have a fixed international order. Despite the end of the Cold War, relations with Russia remain on shaky ground – I say that now from a European perspective.
I firmly believe that the challenges of today’s world cannot be overcome by any one country alone. These challenges require joint efforts. This is why I believe we need multilateral international structures, which we must strengthen and make more efficient. This goes for the European Union, NATO and the United Nations. And it goes for a forum for which Germany is responsible this year, that is, the G20, whose presidency Germany currently holds. This group was set up at the level of Heads of State and Government in 2008 in response to the international financial crisis. Prior to that, it had only existed at Finance Minister level. At the time, we were only able to resolve this far reaching global crisis by working together. This was a good example of how we can also take multilateral action. That is why we chose the motto “shaping an interconnected world” for the G20 Presidency – in the firm belief that joint action strengthens everyone.
However, we now need to acknowledge that multilateral structures are not efficient enough in many areas, with the result that members of the public in almost all of our countries are asking if the multilateral approach is really the right one as regards solving problems or if there is a way to withdraw into protectionism and isolation. I firmly believe that it is worth fighting for joint international multilateral structures. However, we need to improve them in many ways.
In this regard, I would like to start with what we need to improve at home, that is, in the European Union. The European Union is in an exceptionally difficult phase. The outcome of the UK referendum means that we will no longer have 28 Member States in the future, but rather only 27. In my opinion, this is unfortunate – but it is a fact. The 27 Member States must ask themselves all the more how they can make their European Union a success. There are many things with which we cannot be satisfied.
First and foremost, the single market is the hallmark of the European Union. This single market, which also needs to be further expanded in response to the challenges of digital technology, must be of benefit. This means jobs, competitiveness and prosperity for the people. The social market economy in Germany was always a sound guiding principle for society as it led to prosperity for all. And this is also what people expect of the European Union.
Secondly, we need to strengthen our single currency. We have already experienced two profound crises in the European Union from which we have not yet fully recovered. One reason for this is that after we decided to introduce a single currency, the euro, we were not sufficiently prepared for crises and only put security mechanisms in place afterwards in order to safeguard the euro. We will need to continue working on this.
We have now also experienced the same thing as regards freedom of movement. You can move freely and without border controls in most EU Member States. But we were not prepared for the fact that pressure could arise at our external borders, for example as a result of refugee flows, and we had to take steps after this situation arose – through joint border police and many other measures – in order to safeguard this freedom of movement within the Union. We will also need to keep working on this.
The European Union thus needs to learn to concentrate more on the truly important challenges, that is, on competitiveness, jobs, internal security and international security. We will also need to think more in the coming years about where we have superfluous regulations that make our lives difficult and curtail our competitiveness. It cannot be the case that once we have reached an acquis communautaire, as we love to call it, that this is the last word. We must also allow amendments to be made.
Naturally, we want to maintain our friendly relations with the UK. We will also do more in the field of defence policy. The Treaty of Lisbon provides for structured cooperation between the EU Member States. The German and French Defence Ministers have taken the initiative to do more in this area. I think I am right in saying that almost all Member States say that, yes, if we want to be a security union, then we need to do more as regards defence policy. The EU is currently conducting 16 military operations and missions around the world. It covers over a third of the costs of UN peace missions. It is the largest provider of humanitarian aid in both Syria and Afghanistan.
But we need to do more to join up military capabilities. Our Defence Minister spoke about this in detail yesterday. We need leadership within the European Union to allow us to design a joined up approach that can include development policy and good governance, not only military capabilities. This will also enable us to make progress on an area that is particularly important to us in our relations with African countries, namely training and equipping soldiers locally. That is also important.
I firmly believe that European defence capability can never be seen as an alternative to NATO, but must always fit in with NATO’s capabilities. We also share this view.
Particularly when it comes to defence cooperation, Franco German initiatives have frequently played a major role. The Franco German Brigade was founded in 1989 and comprises 6,000 soldiers. We are now working on joint procurement projects. This is great progress. Apart from military cooperation, Germany and France have extremely close ties in other activities, such as internal security. When it comes to protecting the external borders, there are many Franco German initiatives, which will also become initiatives at European level.
As Mr Ischinger just mentioned, we took the initiative on an essential issue by establishing the Normandy format to address the conflict between Ukraine and Russia. I know that further talks will take place on the margins of this conference. Unfortunately, Mr Ischinger, I am unable to report that we have already met all the points in the Minsk agreement. But this agreement remains the basis for further endeavours. We need to continue working not only to further the political process, but also to finally ensure a lasting ceasefire, as people are profoundly unsettled when this does not exist.
The situation in Ukraine leads me on to NATO, the second major topic I wish to address. NATO became even more important for what I would describe as a very sad reason, that is because of the annexation of Crimea and the conflict in eastern Ukraine, where Russia is supporting the separatists. Why is this such a great concern? Why has it led to so much uncertainty? It has led to so much uncertainty – and we must repeatedly remind ourselves about this – because it violated the principle that brought us peace and security in Europe after the Second World War, namely the principle of territorial integrity. This principle is something on which the European peaceful order has been based since the Second World War. That is why we need to be so strict on this issue. If this principle no longer exists, the entire European order will be destabilised.
That is why we – the NATO Secretary General is also here with us – saw the need to strengthen the eastern flank. Germany is taking on responsibility for this in Lithuania; the United Kingdom is doing so in Estonia; and Canada and the United States of America are taking on responsibility in Latvia and Poland respectively. We are doing this in the spirit of Article 5 and assuring each other of our joint capacities and our support.
NATO has also been active in Afghanistan since 2001. This was where the fight against terrorism really began following the attacks on 11 September 2001. Germany is still active, including within NATO, along with 20 other nations in northern Afghanistan. I spoke with the Afghan President yesterday. We also need continued military support here. But we also need a political settlement in order to ensure a peaceful future for Afghanistan.
When we speak about NATO, these days the talk quickly turns to the financial contributions made by each member. I do not want to steer clear of this topic. Like all other countries at the NATO Summit in Wales – that was in 2014 – Germany made a commitment to reach the two percent target within ten years. I join the Defence Minister in saying that we will do our utmost to achieve this and that we feel committed to this target. However, I would also like to add that NATO is profoundly in Europe’s interest, in Germany’s interest and, I believe, also in the United States’ interest. It is a strong alliance of us all. That is why we will work hard and that is why we count on NATO being and remaining a project of joint interest.
Thirdly, ladies and gentlemen, there is a great threat. With regard to the NATO mission in Afghanistan, I mentioned the threat of Islamist terrorism, which has constantly grown since then through IS and other organisations such as Boko Haram. A Counter ISIL Coalition is now responding to this threat. In my view, it is active far beyond the NATO Member countries, naturally in Iraq and Syria. Germany is also involved in this coalition. I just spoke with the Turkish Prime Minister. We know how Turkey in particular, as a NATO partner, is adversely affected by the challenges of Islamist terrorism, by Da'esh and of course equally by PKK terrorism. I want to say very clearly here that Europeans cannot win the fight against Islamist terrorism on their own. We need the military strength of the United States of America. I say this because Islamist terrorism is also being perpetrated very close to the European Union’s external borders and thus has a strong impact on Europe. This is another reason why cooperation with the United States of America is of course very important for us.
But it is equally important to me that we included Islamic, Muslim countries in this coalition, as I believe that these countries in particular must play their part in spelling out that the cause of terrorism is not “Islam”, but rather a misguided form of Islam. That is why I also expect – and I have said this on various occasions – the Islamic religious authorities to speak out clearly about the difference between peaceful Islam and terrorism in the name of Islam. We who are not Muslims cannot do this in the same way the Islamic authorities can.
Ladies and gentlemen, terrorism has a wide ranging impact. It leads to forced migration. I want to underline here what countries around Syria and for example near Iraq have done to help. Turkey has taken in almost three million refugees. Jordan and Lebanon have reached the limits of what is feasible. That is why we have a joint responsibility here – I want to state explicitly that the European Union also has a responsibility – to take in refugees, to address the reasons why people flee, and to help people in need properly. We in Germany have taken on this responsibility along with a few European Member States. Unfortunately, we do not have a joint position on this issue within the European Union. But when you recall that Cyprus is one of Syria’s neighbouring countries, then you see that our external borders also run directly alongside Syria’s. This is why we cannot simply opt out of the question of how people who have been forced to flee are faring. We need to deal with this issue.
I would like to make a further remark on the fight against Islamist terrorism. At the start of my speech, I said that we unfortunately – this is my own point of view – have not been able to establish stable and permanently good relations with Russia in the past 25 years. But Russia is also a neighbouring country of the European Union. Russia is situated at our external border and is a neighbour of ours. That is why I will continue to advocate working towards good relations with Russia, despite our having different opinions on many issues. For me, this means continuing to stand by the NATO Russia Founding Act and not abandoning it even if times are hard – I would like to thank the NATO Secretary General for repeatedly holding meetings between Russia and NATO – and it means looking for common ground in the fight against Islamist terrorism. I believe that we share the exact same interests here and can also work together.
As a final point, I would like to speak about the role of multilateral institutions, particularly that of the United Nations. The contribution made by the United Nations’ work to overall security in the world, as well as the fact that the UN Secretary General is here with us today, is very good and important. After all, this conference now focuses on a very wide ranging definition of security that involves far more than the issue of defence cooperation. And I think this is right. Secretary General Guterres has put crisis prevention at the very top of the agenda of the United Nations’ future work. I can only support that. Every crisis and conflict that can be prevented and does not take place means we do not have to spend money on defence, but instead have a chance to foster development. Africa is an important neighbouring region of the European Union. That is why we need to put our heads together and think about how we can finally bring about dynamic development in Africa like that in Asia in recent decades, alongside classical development aid. This will also be a topic of our G20 Presidency. We have not come as far as I would like, but this is so important. Thanks to smartphones and the spread of digital technology, people now know what life is like in other places. The pressure caused by forced migration will only be overcome when there is development everywhere.
Ladies and gentlemen, we will address many of these topics during our G20 Presidency – the question of forced migration, the question of addressing the reasons why people flee, and the questions of global health and education, particularly the education of girls and women, so that they can live independent lives. I would therefore like to invite all of you to support us in various ways in shaping the G20 Presidency.
Thank you for your attention. It was an honour and a pleasure to give this speech today – in a year in which we all feel incredibly challenged and as if something is at stake. Will we continue being able to take joint action or will we revert to our individual roles? I call on us to find joint positions and I hope we will do so. Let us work together to make the world a better place. It will then be a better place for each and every one of us. Thank you very much indeed.
Nuncio,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I am delighted to have the chance to welcome you warmly to Meseberg together with the Federal Foreign Minister, the Minister of State in the Federal Chancellery, and several State Secretaries. I hope that you all found your way here easily. This was rather more difficult back in the days before GPS; today it is somewhat easier.
We would have liked to invite you here last year and the year before that, but unfortunately the weather was bad, so we did not want to ask this of you. Good things take time and the third time is the charm, as the sayings go – and now, the third time, things have worked out without the weather thwarting our plans.
I would definitely like to invite you to come to Meseberg again another time. It is a wonderful place. You can walk around the lake, and the neighbouring hotel is a terrific place to eat and to stay. So if you from the Embassy side want to take an excursion into the countryside some day, Meseberg lends itself as a good travel destination.
Ladies and gentlemen, in comparison to rescheduling a diplomatic reception, it is often much more difficult to react appropriately time after time in the day-to-day business of diplomacy when things happen differently than expected. All of you have experience with seeking new approaches again and again. In many areas it takes a lot of patience and tact to keep lines of communication consistently open despite certain differences and to seek solutions. But the willingness and ability to engage in dialogue have value in and of themselves. This is something that we know all too well against the backdrop of European history.
A few weeks ago French President François Hollande and I stood at the graves of soldiers who lost their lives 100 years ago in the Battle of Verdun. The First World War was the result of diplomatic and political failure. Such visits remind all of us, time and again, that it is better to try one time too many to keep the lines of communication open than one time too few. The fact that we – I mean Germany and France – are able today to commemorate the dead together in friendship is due to the diplomatic skill and political foresight that the fathers and mothers of European unification demonstrated.
For me, the unification of Europe is and remains a priceless stroke of good fortune, to which we owe both our life in peace and freedom and our high standard of living. Together as the European Union, we are better equipped for major tasks of our times than each Member State alone would be. The British referendum has changed nothing about this. The fact that a majority in the United Kingdom has come out in favour of leaving the EU, however, is something that I and the entire Federal Government deeply regret. This decision is a bitter turning point. I remain, however, firmly convinced that the European Union is strong enough to bear this caesura, too.
It is now up to the United Kingdom to communicate its wish to exit officially to the EU. Only then can the process begin. We also agreed on this at the recent European Council. The United Kingdom will have to clarify quickly what form it wants its future relationship with the European Union to take. I can only emphasise from the German side that the United Kingdom is an important partner to which we want to remain closely connected in the future. Of course, however, the EU and the remaining 27 Member States must safeguard their interests. Whoever would like free access to the European single market, for example, will in return have to accept all of the fundamental freedoms, including free movement of persons.
After the referendum, we in Europe certainly cannot simply return to our daily business as usual. We must consider together what lessons we will draw for the further process of European unification. This will start with a special meeting in Bratislava in September. Naturally, many people are asking whether the answer lies with “more” or “less” of Europe. In my view, such a discussion falls short. We need a successful Europe. This is the goal that we must pursue. We must increase Europe’s competitive strength and bolster its research and innovation in order not only to maintain our position in promising economic sectors, but also to set standards ourselves as Europeans. This is also a necessary condition for us to be able to offer our young people better future prospects than we can today, for far too many people in Europe are affected by unemployment right now. We need structural reforms. We need sound finances. And, above all, we need energy and drive to truly advance innovation.
When we met in this group a year ago, I had come from Brussels the day before. Once again, the European Heads of State and Government had been dealing with the so-called Euro crisis. It was clear to everyone that there could be no simple solution process. But at that time we agreed on a path nonetheless. And I can say today that we have indeed made progress. Things work better together – this is the conviction that sustains Europe.
A year ago, a new challenge was already looming, one that has put precisely this European community spirit to the test again: Refugees have fled their homes in large numbers due to war, violence and lack of opportunity, to seek protection elsewhere or to start an entirely new life. In August 2015, for the first time, more than 100,000 refugees arrived in the Greek islands via Turkey. This was the beginning of an unprecedented refugee flow via the so-called Western Balkan route to central and northern Europe.
Taking in and caring for so many people in such a brief period has been an enormous effort. We in Germany know this from our own experience. Our country has offered protection to hundreds of thousands of men, women and children. In doing so, we are and have been able to depend on many professional and volunteer helpers, who have clearly risen to the occasion. But at this point I also want to thank all of the countries neighbouring Iraq and Syria that have taken in refugees. Europe has not taken in the most refugees; rather, it is countries such as Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan which are particularly affected.
In the past year, however, we have also learned that we must budget our energies. This means that we have to focus on those people who are truly in need of protection, which is why I have stressed our three essential objectives from the outset: we want to reduce the number of refugees, noticeably and permanently; we want to replace illegal migration with legal migration and remove the foundation for the people smugglers’ inhuman business; and we want to create a shared solution. The EU-Turkey Agreement meets these requirements. Since its implementation, far fewer refugees have been undertaking the dangerous journey across the Aegean.
But, of course, this does not mean that the problem has disappeared from the world. On the contrary: the number of refugees and internally displaced persons worldwide has sadly reached a new record level. The UN High Commissioner for Refugees estimates more than 65 million worldwide now. This unimaginable number in itself makes clear that we as a global community are needed here. That is why Germany held a conference on Syria at the beginning of this year together with the United Kingdom, Kuwait, Norway and the United Nations. The meeting in London set new standards for international support. Firstly, we were able to raise more than twelve billion US dollars to improve the situation of Syrian refugees. Secondly, the conference also initiated changes in the countries taking in refugees in the region. They have gradually opened up their labour markets to refugees and offered school places to children. What Turkey, Lebanon and Jordan are accomplishing here, as I’ve said before, truly merits respect.
In the course of the Supporting Syria & the Region Conference, Germany pledged 2.3 billion euros – 1.3 billion of it for 2016 alone. This made Germany the largest donor, but many other countries also announced generous help. But the most important thing now is for the money truly to reach people. We have seen that families could scarcely endure the situation when the funds for their food rations were lowered from 30 dollars per person per month, which is already very little, to 13 dollars.
Of course, remedying the causes of flight and displacement is even better than mitigating their effects. That is why we continue to focus our efforts on bringing peace to the conflict in Syria. Our Federal Foreign Minister is intensely involved in this. The basis for a political transformation process is that the agreed ceasefire is respected and that it is possible for the millions of internally displaced persons to receive assistance. There must be an end to the use of outlawed weapons such as barrel bombs. There must be an end to targeted attacks on hospitals and humanitarian personnel. There must be an end to starvation policy.
We have a changed situation in Syria as a result of Russian intervention on the side of the Assad regime. Naturally, we therefore expect Moscow also to be intensely involved in finding a viable political solution. Fortunately, talks are underway. Consultations with the United States are also being held. I hope that by the time of a reception like this one next year, the situation in Syria will be better than it is now.
Whether in Syria or elsewhere, the fight against the so-called Islamic State will go on. We must systematically remove the raison d’être of its followers, so that the seed of hatred can no longer sprout. The victims of the recent attacks in Saudi Arabia and Bangladesh, in Baghdad and Istanbul, admonish us to do this. At this point I would like to recall the victims of the cowardly attacks in Brussels and Paris once again.
After the terrorist attacks in its capital, France invoked the EU mutual assistance clause. This was the first time that any Member State had exercised this option from the Treaty of Lisbon. As a consequence of this, Germany, among other countries, has expanded its military engagement against IS. IS has since lost large parts of the territory it had acquired in Syria and Iraq. We support the Iraqi Government in enabling refugees to return to the areas that have been liberated. The task here is, above all, to reconstruct vital infrastructures.
At the same time, we must prevent terrorist gangs from taking advantage of the unstable situation in Libya in order to proliferate there. Germany and the European Union are strongly committed to making it possible for solid state structures to be established in this afflicted country. The Libyan Political Agreement of last December was an important incremental success. It was negotiated by UN Special Representative Martin Kobler. The situation in the country, however, remains highly tense. We need more recognition and support for the unity government. This also applies to constructing a new security architecture, of course.
There is scarcely any country today that can be observed in isolation. That is why our horizon extends beyond Libya to the entire region. The streams of refugees from various countries across the central Mediterranean are only one more reason for this. When we see how many people have already drowned in the Mediterranean, despite our utmost efforts to save human lives, we can see that time is running very short.
Germany and the European Union will expand their migration partnerships in Africa. This is a twofold approach. Firstly, it is to better secure the borders, to effectively curb people smuggling and illegal migration and to facilitate repatriation. Secondly, we must help to improve the opportunities that are available to people in their own home countries. We are prepared to do so, but what we expect of our partners – if I may say so – is responsible governance and willingness to engage in positive cooperation.
The European Union has now become an internationally recognised actor through its broad-ranging involvement worldwide. There is still room, however, for it to live up to its increased responsibility even more. What is pivotal here is our European Common Security and Defence Policy. This can be shaped in an even more effective and strongly results-oriented way. We must develop both civilian and military capacities. This is to be regarded not as competing with NATO, but as supplementing it. It was also very good that the EU and NATO concluded a cooperation agreement at the last NATO Summit in Warsaw.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organisation has been and remains crucially important to us. Together, the members defend the values and principles that have shaped our post-war order and secured us a life in peace and freedom. The day before yesterday, we returned from the two-day NATO Summit in Warsaw. There were three strong messages. Firstly, we underscored solidarity within the alliance. Security is indivisible. This commitment is the main pillar of the Euro-Atlantic security architecture. Secondly, we committed ourselves to doing our part to deal with challenges such as collapsing states, terrorism and civil war. The alliance has a vested interest in stabilising the situation in the European neighbourhood. Thirdly, NATO reaffirmed its offers of dialogue to Russia. Yes, there are differences. But this makes it all the more important for us to exchange views and to speak to each other, not about each other. We are interested in serious, results-oriented talks.
It is a good thing that a NATO-Russia Council will be taking place on Wednesday. Of course, this talk will particularly address Ukraine and the Ukraine conflict. This conflict cannot be resolved militarily. But it can be resolved through political, peaceful and diplomatic means. The Minsk agreements continue to show the way towards this. What is decisive now is implementation. Some steps have been taken, but many still lie ahead of us. As a partner in the “Normandy” format, Germany joins France in supporting the work of the trilateral contact group. We seek to continue mediating. Germany is also using its OSCE Chairmanship this year to work out viable approaches to solutions.
Security policy issues also play a role in our work as the G7 and the G20. While these have traditionally been economic and financial policy forums, global challenges such as geopolitical conflicts, climate change and epidemics undoubtedly also have an impact on economic trends and prospects. In view of our many interdependencies, it is crucial not just to react to undesirable developments. Risks must also be identified as early as possible, foreseeable consequences must be analysed, and effective precautionary measures must be taken. It is therefore important to create an international framework with principles and rules and to strengthen the institutions that enforce this framework.
At the end of the year, Germany will take over the G20 Presidency from China. One key priority will be taking up the central idea of the social market economy. This means that we want to put more emphasis on economic competitive strength and social responsibility as a single unit, for the two of them are mutually dependent in their form and development.
Along with fundamental issues of regulatory policy, we will of course go into greater thematic detail. We also want to pick up on some of the initiatives that we have already launched under the German G7 Presidency. These include, for example, the area of health. We are thinking, among other things, of conducting a pandemic drill. We are also keen to work on a common approach to antibiotic resistance. And we will be discussing the crosscutting theme of digitalisation, as increasing interconnectedness will still entail many profound changes – in production, in trade, in the workplace, in mobility and also in consumer protection.
At the G7 Summit in Elmau, we agreed that internationally recognised labour, social and environmental standards had to be better implemented at all points along the global value and supply chain. We also want to take up this topic at the G20 Summit. We need global unity not least for the practical implementation of the Paris Agreement and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In a year’s time, the Summit of Heads of State and Government will take place in Hamburg. It will be preceded by a series of ministerial meetings as well as meetings with civil society and other actors. As is usual in the G20, international organisations and several guest countries will also be invited. Germany is using its G20 Presidency as an opportunity to take on international responsibility, as it did with the OSCE Chairmanship this year. We would like to communicate to our partners in the world that they can rely on us.
The European Championship in football ended yesterday. I congratulate Portugal most warmly. We share your joy. We would also like to thank France for taking on the role of host in times that are not easy. It was a wonderful celebration of sport. Perhaps this evening in smaller discussion groups we will also see those who neither hosted the event nor won every game licking their wounds. In any case, we know that football brings people together and football generates enthusiasm. And sometimes we also experience disappointment together.
I would once again like to welcome you here most warmly. Thank you so much for the long journey you have taken to be here. We hope you will not be disappointed. I wish us all a lovely evening.
Ministers,
Excellencies,
Professor Große,
Ladies and gentlemen,
I would like to extend a very warm welcome to all of you, particularly those of you from the Sub‑Saharan Africa Initiative of German Business and, of course, our guests. I am delighted you are taking part in this conference whether digitally or in person.
On my many trips, I have got to know Africa as a continent of opportunities and ideas, as a continent with promising growth markets and many, many committed young people. That is why the G20 Compact with Africa, created during Germany’s G20 Presidency in 2017, was and remains particularly important to the Federal Government and to me personally. I am pleased that this Investment Summit is now being held for the third time and that we as partner countries can inject further impetus into our economic relations. There is a good chance of success and I want to outline three reasons why.
Firstly, the Compact with Africa is working. In most Compact countries, reforms have improved the business environment. Compared to Africa as a whole in the period up to and including 2019, they were able to attract above-average investment levels, also from German companies. Furthermore, in 2020 the Compact countries did actually chalk up 0.1% growth while other African economies were struggling with negative growth. This shows that the reforms that the Compact countries have launched are paying off. In these times of the pandemic, this is not something we can take for granted, even though of course the pandemic has made its presence felt. Above all this year, many companies were not able to launch or extend their investment as originally planned. Yet a survey of more than a hundred German companies revealed that almost all those questioned were sticking to their plans even though implementation of course now has a question mark attached.
In Africa and in every other continent, keeping the pandemic under control and if possible overcoming it is crucial for economic recovery. For this, we need above all to increase global production of the vaccines and ensure they are distributed fairly. That is why Germany supported the G20 initiatives ACT Accelerator and COVAX from the outset. Having earmarked 2.2 billion euro, we are the world’s second-largest donor after the United States. We are also involved in sharing vaccine doses. As part of COVAX and as Co-Chair together with South Africa, Germany is committed to increasing global vaccine production. We are also providing concrete support to set up production in Africa.
However, we do of course need to think beyond this time of the pandemic. It is thus right for the Federal Government to continue supporting both Compact countries and reform, as well as businesses and investment.
And that brings me to my second point: the Compact creates new opportunities. I would like to draw your attention to the three pillars of the development investment funds. We are using them to support the plans of businesses to engage more on the African market. The first pillar of this fund is AfricaConnect which provides financing on attractive terms. The green light has now been given for 22 local business projects. With the second pillar, AfricaGrow, we are focusing on the financing needs of small and medium-sized businesses and for start-ups in Africa. The Federal Government is supporting AfricaGrow with more than 500 million euro. Companies wanting to branch out can only do so if they know about the market. This is where the third pillar, Africa Business Network, comes into play. It offers as it were tailor-made advice and mentoring both in Germany as well as through the chambers of commerce abroad or in digital form through the Africa Business Guide. The latest instrument to be added is the fixed-rate programme Africa-CIRR. CIRR stands for Commercial Interest Reference Rate. With this instrument we are thus mitigating the risk of interest rate fluctuation for financing German exports to Africa.
As you can see, there are various support mechanisms in place and it is up to businesses to use them. I want to encourage you to reach out to the Business Network and find out more about the various instruments.
The reform partnerships are also all about creating new opportunities and are now helping seven Compact countries to improve the conditions for private-sector involvement. Also when it comes to emergency aid to tackle the repercussions of the pandemic, our close cooperation has paid off.
All this shows – and this brings me to my third point –: the Compact has a future. This is a view shared by many, as also shown by the many participants in this conference. We are still thinking about how we can use the Compact to lower the remaining hurdles to trade and investment. Africa has vast potential as a market but this is a potential we need to tap more successfully.
We have every reason to look to the future with confidence. Take for example the G7 Infrastructure Initiative which I hope will create fresh impetus for new investment, also in African countries. Investment in renewable energies is a particular priority. It is hugely important to invest here so that we can actually achieve our global climate targets. Furthermore, as a result of the launch of the African Continental Free Trade Area, the discussion on an EU-Africa agreement has also gained momentum. The Compact with Africa is certainly helping pave the way here.
So I am looking forward to a lively dialogue both on progress made in the Compact process and also on creating fresh impetus for this multilateral initiative. On this note, I hope we all have a successful discussion.
Thank you very much.
Mr President, Emmanuel Macron,
Mr Mayor,
Charlemagne Prize Laureates,
Esteemed Board of Directors,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
When it awards the Charlemagne Prize each year, the city of Aachen sends a clear signal of support for a united Europe. Just as Europe deserves to be celebrated, people who not only believe in this Europe, but breathe life into it with their own actions, also deserve to be honoured.
The man after whom this prize is named, Charlemagne, who even during his own lifetime was referred to as the “father of Europe”, established Aachen as his principal palace at the end of the eighth century. It was here that he brought together scholars from all across Europe. The impetus for science and culture that emanated from Aachen at the time can still be felt today. Here at this Town Hall, not far from Aachen Cathedral, we sense these cultural roots at every turn. We also have a sense of the ups and downs of European history.
In 2018, we are marking the centenary of the end of the First World War. Today’s prizewinner, Emmanuel Macron, hails from Amiens, a city before whose gates an entire European generation once perished in the trenches. Anyone who visits the graves of those whose lives were ripped away from them because national narrow‑mindedness and delusion brought our continent to the abyss can appreciate the value of European integration – integration that has brought us peace and freedom, democracy and the rule of law. It is only European unity that safeguards these achievements for the future.
Glancing at the list of Charlemagne Prize Laureates since 1950 is like reading a brief account of recent European history. From the European Coal and Steel Community to the establishment of the European Union to the introduction of the euro and the major feat that was eastward enlargement, it was always prominent public figures, courageous women and men, who gave Europe a face, all of them united by their passion for the European idea.
It is true that Europe needs and thrives on passion – a passion with which today’s prizewinner, President of the French Republic Emmanuel Macron, also goes about his work. He was born in 1977 and was 11 or 12 years old when the Cold War came to an end. With Emmanuel Macron, a young and dynamic politician has joined the European stage for whom European integration and the single currency are a matter of course. However, he is also a politician who senses that this poses the greatest risk to European integration and to the European model. Perhaps this is also because there are fewer and fewer people who, as eye‑witnesses, are able to tell us about the early days of Europe, about the courage and compromises that were needed.
Emmanuel Macron knows that today’s generation must continue to shape Europe with its own inspiration. He has understood – and stated repeatedly, most recently at the European Parliament in Strasbourg on 17 April – that, in view of the different challenges facing the EU at home and abroad, today’s generation will play a crucial role. It is their historic responsibility to actively defend and strengthen European democracy, the European value system, the European social model and the dignity of each and every individual – in a nutshell, everything that constitutes European identity – and to place this on a new footing where necessary.
Emmanuel, today’s date, 10 May, serves as a warning to us. It was on this day in 1933 that National Socialists in Berlin and other German university cities burned books by numerous authors whom they couldn't abide, including works by Heinrich Heine, Sigmund Freud, Heinrich and Thomas Mann, Karl Marx and Kurt Tucholsky. Today, 85 years or an entire human life later, we must recall that liberal values are a fragile commodity that we must continue to protect and defend. What is important once again today – as you have said on repeated occasions – is to stand up to narrow‑minded, retrograde nationalisms and the temptation of authoritarianism. In Strasbourg, you talked about the authority of democracy, which must be stronger than the temptation of authoritarianism.
What is it that sets Emmanuel Macron apart and shows that he has deservedly won the Charlemagne Prize today, one year since taking office? Allow me to highlight three aspects. Firstly, Emmanuel Macron knows what holds Europe together at its core. Secondly, Emmanuel Macron has clear visions of where and how Europe should continue to develop. Thirdly, Emmanuel Macron brings his enthusiasm for Europe to the table.
This enthusiasm not only motivates those who are committed to Europe, but, above all, it has the capacity to win over those who are hesitant or faltering; and it is decisive when it comes to opposing those who are forever stuck in the past. Both in his election campaign and everyday political life, Emmanuel Macron has managed to embody this enthusiasm in everything that he does. This is the basis for the fresh start that was triggered by his election as French President.
Emmanuel Macron knows that only a self‑confident France can inject fresh impetus into the European idea. This is why he is not only consistently working to implement his reform agenda, but is also reviving the intellectual, philosophical and cultural roots of his home nation.
Time and again, Emmanuel Macron underscores the importance of preserving and strengthening European democracy – from his address in Athens, at the foot of the Acropolis, on 7 September last year to his speech at the European Parliament. A functioning democracy and functioning rule of law at national and European level are crucial if Europeans are to be able to develop, fundamental and human rights are to be respected and debates about the best solutions for our Community are to be held in a free and fair manner, even if this sometimes takes longer than some might like.
Moreover, Emmanuel Macron repeatedly talks about how our cultural and historical togetherness has grown over the centuries, in good times and bad. I recall in particular his speech in Frankfurt am Main at the opening of the Frankfurt Book Fair in October 2017. In his speech, he set out his understanding of Europe’s cultural identity. It is important, at a time in which there is a greater focus on the final paragraphs of various directives and regulations, to keep this dimension in mind. All of the nations of Europe have exchanged ideas and enriched one another for centuries in philosophy, literature, our languages, music, painting and architecture. –I would like to thank you, Bishop, for your sermon, which reminded us once again of the dimension of religion and Christianity, which was the inspiration for all of this.
The fact that Emmanuel Macron gave his speech at the Sorbonne was no coincidence. The Europe of scholars, the Europe of science, pre‑dates the Treaties of Rome. Beyond the realm of scholars, traders, journeymen and pilgrims also played their part in a constant exchange on our continent. Were it not for these common foundations, European political and economic integration would have been impossible. Differences do not divide us, but bring us together time and again – out of curiosity for the other and in an attempt to deepen our understanding. Germans and French people in particular know this all too well. We have different political cultures and often approach European issues from different angles. We talk and listen to each other – and find common paths at the end of the day. These are the challenges and the magic of Europe that I, if I may say so myself, have been privileged to experience time and again, particularly, Emmanuel Macron, when working together with you this year.
Withdrawing to the national level is not the answer. We Europeans are united by more than merely the common market or single currency. Europe must always be more than its shared history, more than its triumph over past differences and wars on its territory. Europe is now the crucial project for our continent’s future. In his address on the 60th anniversary of the signing of the Treaties of Rome, Pope Francis told us, the Heads of State and Government of the European Union, that Europe will find new hope when it is open to the future. He said this after likening Europe to a grandmother in a speech to the European Parliament. Although it is nice to be a grandmother, the fact that the Pope says we will find new hope if we are open to the future speaks volumes.
In view of the enormous global challenges, we Europeans can only make our influence felt if we join forces. Only by working together will we acquire or maintain our ability to act – our sovereignty, as Emmanuel Macron would say. One of the exciting aspects of Franco‑German discussion on sovereignty often involves the question of how much we need to protect this future Europe and how open we Europeans need to be. How do we find the right balance between these two things? This question affects all of our discussions, be they on trade, shaping the digital single market or drawing up a common foreign policy.
What is involved here? Europe needs to show that in a globalised world, it is not part of the problem, but rather part of the solution. That is the key question that led Emmanuel Macron to put European Union renewal at the heart of his policies through his speech at the Sorbonne. It is also why we in Germany put the chapter on further developing the European Union at the beginning of our coalition agreement. And it is the reason why we share France’s conviction that we need a new start in Europe.
We need to work together to provide very concrete answers at European level to the great questions of the present and the future. Allow me to mention four areas.
Firstly, there is the question of a European strategy on innovation and investment aimed at boosting the economy in an age of globalisation and digital transformation. Europe has always held the promise of prosperity. But in view of the huge challenges of technological transformation, it is no longer certain that we will be the ones to determine the course of the world. To be honest, we no longer do so in many areas. We must aim to catch up again here, be it in the field of artificial intelligence, in which Germany and France will work closely together, or as regards dealing with disruptive innovations. When we meet the Heads of State and Government of the European Union in Sofia next week, Germany and France will present a proposal on new institutional cooperation in Europe.
I support President Macron’s idea of creating European universities in order to foster the education and research scene in Europe. The signing of a joint declaration in Strasbourg on 12 April by those responsible in Land Baden‑Württemberg and the French region Grand Est is the first concrete step in this direction. The five regional universities in the Upper Rhine area will be merged into a single scientific region, which will serve as a role model. This is something we urgently need because we who were the first to produce cars in Europe, for example, now rely on batteries from Asia and digital technology from the United States. That cannot be our goal in the social market economy. We owe it to the people to be ahead in the game. That will only be possible if Europe makes a concerted effort.
Secondly, I would like to address European asylum and migration policy. Freedom of movement is the foundation of the single market. However, we can only maintain this freedom if we reform our asylum systems and make them into a common system, which must be based on the principle of solidarity, fair and able to withstand crises. In order to preserve freedom of movement, it is also essential that we protect Europe’s outer borders. But we know that walls will not help to solve the problem. What we really need is a common policy on Africa. Emmanuel Macron has been President for a year and in this time alone, we have already set up impressive joint projects, for example in the Sahel region, and achieved close Franco‑German cooperation, which we plan to continue.
Thirdly, ladies and gentlemen, we naturally need the economic and monetary union and to ensure that it is sustainable. Many discussions these days revolve around this very point. I can tell you that, yes, these are difficult discussions, which we are conducting from different cultural viewpoints. However, we will make progress on the banking union; we will make headway on the capital market union; and we will make the eurozone stronger and more competitive. We intend to present solutions on these issues by June. And we will do so.
Fourthly, there is the question of our common foreign and security policy. Europe’s role in fostering peace and stability depends on its ability to act in concert and to speak with one voice on the international stage. After decades of discussion, we recently managed to achieve permanent structured cooperation in defence policy. That is a huge step forward and one that took us a long time to achieve. But let’s be honest – Europe is still at the very start when it comes to a common foreign policy. However, this is what we will need for our own survival because the nature of conflicts has changed completely since the end of the Cold War. A great many global conflicts are taking place on Europe’s doorstep. And it is not the case that the United States of America will simply protect us. Instead, Europe must take its destiny in its own hands. That is our job for the future.
As a role model for what is happening on our doorstep, I would like to mention the countries of the Western Balkans and to thank Boyko Borisov, whose country holds the Presidency of the Council of the European Union and who is here with us today, for being open to inviting the countries of the Western Balkans and the EU Heads of State and Government to Sofia next week. We have a duty here, one that will decide on war and peace in our continent, and we must live up to it.
Germany and France have taken an important step as regards the conflict in Ukraine. I am pleased that Petro Poroshenko is here with us today. Although we have not yet achieved our goals in the Normandy format, we know that staying power is often a prerequisite for resolving conflicts. We will continue to demonstrate this staying power in order to safeguard Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty.
Together, we – and in particular the UK, France and Germany – have defended our stance on the nuclear agreement with Iran. We know that we are facing an extremely complex situation. The escalation of the past hours shows us that this is truly a matter of war and peace. I can only call on all those involved to show restraint.
We need a political settlement in the entire region on our doorstep. Syria is not just somewhere. It borders EU Member States such as Cyprus. That is why we will need to work far more intensively on this issue in the coming weeks and months – and that also goes for Germany, which needs to play a larger role – in order to find a political solution for everything that involves Syria. The many refugees who have come to Germany show us that we cannot simply look the other way. Instead, we need to work on fostering peace in this region.
Ladies and gentlemen, European development is certainly at a critical stage. Everyone senses that. The founding fathers created Europe in response to the terrible wars of the first half of the 20th century. Europe is and will remain a peace project. Our generation’s historic responsibility is to ensure that Europe is firmly established both as a positive project for the future of our continent and a part of the global order. To this end, all Heads of State and Government will continue to work hard with the European Commission. Each and every one of us will do our utmost, including today’s prizewinner, Emmanuel Macron, who will do so with the passion that is unique to him.
My dear Emmanuel, please accept my warmest congratulations. Your enthusiasm, dedication and courage are an inspiration to others. You bubble over with ideas and have breathed new life into the debate on Europe with your proposals. Today’s award does not only serve to confirm that you are on the right path, but also to encourage and motivate you to continue along it with confidence. I look forward to being able to work with you on this path.
Thank you very much and my warmest congratulations!
Excellencies,
Fellow members of the German Bundestag,
Ms Eid,
Mr Vrolijk,
Mr Stäcker,
Ladies and gentlemen,
And most importantly, Julia Rotich,
During Germany’s G20 Presidency in 2017, one of the events I attended was the Women20 Dialogue Forum, a panel discussion in Berlin. We talked about how more can be done to support women in social, political and economic leadership roles. Juliana Rotich, a successful young entrepreneur, was also at this event. I have very vivid memories of how much she inspired the audience with her beliefs and ideas.
Ms Rotich, you have demonstrated an outstanding sense of what matters in social policy, as well as entrepreneurial expertise, particularly as regards digital advances in Africa. As a result, you are receiving the German Africa Award today, and I can only congratulate the jury on choosing you as the winner. Allow me to take this opportunity to congratulate you in person now.
How does innovation start? It always begins with the courage to call things into question and the refusal to accept things as they are. And many people in Africa demonstrate the courage to take risks and to try something new.
In the Horn of Africa region, for example, Ethiopian Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed showed great courage and strength in opening up his country’s economic and political system. He was awarded this year’s Nobel Peace Prize for this and for his endeavours to achieve peace with Eritrea.
Following decades of dictatorship, the people in the Sudan can now also hope for peaceful and democratic coexistence, even if there is no doubt whatsoever that the challenges are still enormous.
The progress in the path to founding an African Continental Free Trade Area is also a welcome development. The launch of the operational phase of the free trade area in late May was a major milestone on this path. The fact that the Niger was able to host an African Union conference for the first time was also a great milestone for the country. I hope that the goal of a free trade area will be achieved and that intra-African trade can gain significant momentum.
Not only do these and many other new developments demonstrate courage, they also encourage people. Ms Rotich, you are one of the people who have taken on this responsibility and role-model function. You fight for greater political ownership and transparency. And you do so with the help of new technologies. With the open-source platform Ushahidi and the tech firm BRCK, which you co-founded and co‑developed, you have shown how innovative IT products can improve the day‑to‑day lives of many, many people.
Ushahidi has been translated into more than 30 languages and is used in many countries to shed more light on current events and to create transparency, be this for the purpose of crisis response or election observation. Civil-society engagement has thus been strengthened in a very concrete way. BRCK’s multi-connector device is sold all over the world. Even in crisis situations, it ensures that people can communicate without any problems. In a nutshell, Ms Rotich, it is thanks not least to you that “IT Made in Africa” is in demand worldwide.
Africa is a rapidly developing market for information and communications technology. Whether we are talking about the healthcare system, the education system, the financial sector or other services, digital progress can be seen almost everywhere. This often takes the form of huge technological leaps forward, whereby obsolete technologies are simply bypassed in favour of the latest tech developments.
I also want us here in Germany to be aware of this so we don’t wake up one day and discover that our passion for paper files has blinded us to how quickly the world is turning in other places. For example, in Kenya, where Ms Rotich hails from, mobile payment is already far more widespread than it is here in Germany. You can receive and send money on your phone in Kenya, even if you don’t have a bank account. That enables you to pay bills and do other business transactions. Without this, many micro-enterprises in Africa would go out of business or wouldn’t exist in the first place.
Start-ups are breathing new life into Africa’s economy with innovative ideas and the use of key technologies such as blockchain and 3D printing. Nairobi has been regarded as Silicon Savannah for years. And co-working spaces have simply mushroomed. Naturally, such developments are not found all over Africa. But the potential for them exists in many places. And this potential should be used.
The Strategic Partnership Digital Africa launched by the Federal Government also makes use of this potential. It helps to forge ties between local partners and the European business and development cooperation sectors. The aim is to develop business ideas and put them into practice. I would also like to mention the initiative, Make-IT in Africa, through which the Federal Government has already helped over 190 tech start-ups in 23 African countries since 2017 to set up their business and make contacts. We also strengthen local ecosystems for tech start-ups through this initiative. As a co-founder of the iHub in Nairobi, Ms Rotich, you know how important strong networks and supportive institutions are.
When I was in Ghana last year, I spoke with several young entrepreneurs who have successfully launched their products and services on the market thanks to their truly astounding ideas. They work in a very wide range of sectors, including renewable energies, food, agricultural technologies, health, education, and of course software. However, these young entrepreneurs also told me about how hard it is to find investors.
That is precisely where our Compact with Africa comes in. Twelve African countries are already part of it. Our aim is to improve the parameters for long-term private-sector investment and employment. I am pleased that I will have the opportunity to host the Heads of State and Government of the Compact with Africa countries again at a conference in Berlin in November.
In order to support the initiative, we have set up a new fund through which additional venture capital will be provided to existing African funds. The target groups are African start-ups and micro-enterprises. A lack of capital should not prevent good ideas from being turned into success stories.
Women in particular have good ideas that they can use to foster development and transformation. That is why we also provide support from Germany to a large number of companies in Africa that were founded by women. However, not only do we support female entrepreneurs at the national level, we also help them via multilateral initiatives, particularly through the G7 and the G20. For example, we launched the Women Entrepreneurs Finance Initiative at the G20 Summit in Hamburg in 2017. By the way, the idea for this came from the Women20 Dialogue Forum I mentioned earlier on. Another initiative is the #eSkills4Girls that we launched in Hamburg. The idea here is to enable girls and women in developing and emerging countries to be able to make use of digital opportunities in the same way as boys and men. And at this year’s G7 Summit in Biarritz, France, we expressly stated that one of our priorities is to promote female entrepreneurship. On the German side, we underlined this statement with a pledge to provide 30 million euros to the African Development Bank’s funding programme for women.
We realise that we can provide incentives on the political side and improve the parameters for entrepreneurship. In this way, we are also trying to – let me put it this way – persuade more and more German firms to do business with Africa. You sometimes need to use the art of persuasion here because certain stereotypical images still prevail. At the start of today’s event, you saw a map that showed the world from the Germans’ perspective. Unfortunately, it is still the case that many people associate Africa with problems rather than opportunities. I can only urge us not to miss the boat here, but rather to recognise the opportunities in Africa. We have a lot to do.
But role models like you, Ms Rotich, inspire and motivate us. Your achievements also empower many other women. You show what and how much one can change in the economy, society and other countries with good ideas and determination. We need people like you who have the courage to try new things and thus inspire others to follow in their footsteps.
That is why I would like to say that the jury made an excellent decision in choosing to present the German Africa Award to Juliana Rotich. I am certain that you will not only see this prize as a tribute to your hard work, but also as a motivation. I am very interested to see what ideas you will come up with next. I wish you every success. Once again, allow me to offer you my warmest congratulations. All the best!
Prime Minister, Distinguished colleagues, Barbara Hendricks, Ladies and gentlemen,
Allow me to start by saying a few words on what happened last night. I’ve been following the reports from Manchester with great sadness and shock. It’s incomprehensible that someone could take advantage of a cheerful pop concert to kill or seriously injure so many people – so many young people. I’d like to convey my sincere condolences to all victims and those affected by this tragedy, as well as to their families in their grief and despair. This suspected terrorist attack will merely strengthen our determination to continue working together with our friends from the UK to combat those who plan and carry out such despicable acts. People in the UK can rest assured that Germany stands shoulder to shoulder with them.
Ladies and gentlemen, let us observe a minute of silence to remember the victims of this tragic event. – Thank you.
 
Prime Minister, Barbara Hendricks, Ladies and gentlemen, 
As in previous years, we’ve gathered here in Berlin to prepare the next UN Climate Change Conference, the 23rd of its kind. – Naturally, I’m delighted that the OECD Secretary-General is with us today. He has presented us with a report on which I’ll say something in a minute. – In contrast to previous years, the Climate Change Conference itself will also take place in Germany, namely in Bonn. However, the Presidency will be held by another country, the Republic of Fiji – thus allowing us to enter into unchartered territory, as it were. I’d therefore like to extend an especially warm welcome to all our guests from the other side of the globe. I greet you with a cordial “Bula” which – so I’ve been told – means “welcome” in Fiji.
With Germany and the Republic of Fiji, we have two countries working together which lie far apart in geographical terms. However, we’re united by our shared conviction and will to contain the impact of climate change as much as we can. It has to be said that we’re looking at global warming from very different perspectives. Climate change poses a much more direct threat to a country made up of more than 300 islands and located in the tropical climate of the South Pacific. Germany, by contrast, lies in the heart of Europe in a moderate climate zone. As a highly developed industrialised country, we are responsible for relatively high CO2 emissions. Naturally, we thus bear considerable responsibility for ensuring a change of direction.
I’m sure we all agree that the international community made a historic decision when it adopted the Paris Agreement. We undertook to keep global warming under 2°C and to limit it to 1.5°C if possible. The latter goal in particular, namely limiting global warming to 1.5°C, was of great importance to the island states. For every rise in temperature means a rise in sea levels. Today's paradises are at risk of disappearing.
It was therefore vitally important that the international climate agreement was adopted and could enter into force quickly. Of the 197 signatory states, around 150 have now ratified it. As of 18 May 2017, 146 states had done so. Decisions are right and important. However, now we have to rise to the challenge; now the right steps have to follow.
The Conference of the Parties in Marrakech last year sent a clear message: we want to advance along the path we have embarked upon. Moreover, a schedule was adopted for making the decisions made in Paris more concrete and fostering initiatives. The key question remains as to how we can guarantee that all states make, and are indeed able to make, their national contributions towards reducing greenhouse gases. It’s clear that industrialised nations and larger emerging economies have to lead the way. Developing countries must be given support – whether it be financial or technological assistance. That’s why Germany joined forces with Morocco, the host country of the last UN Climate Conference, to establish the NDC Partnership. Just under 60 states have now joined.
At the UN Conference in Bonn, the focus will be on drafting a detailed instrument on implementing the Paris Agreement. For example, we need uniform standards so that national reduction targets and reporting on them really are comparable; in my view, this is an extremely important issue. This will also engender transparency and a solid basis for ensuring that states trust each other and engage in genuine exchange. Our plan is to make enough progress in Bonn so that we can then make the necessary decisions at the UN Conference in Poland in 2018. Moreover, we want to prepare for the facilitative dialogue next year. It will help all states to review their targets. It’s also a trial run for the global stocktake in 2023.
Furthermore, the Presidency of the Republic of Fiji will draw attention to the states hit hardest by climate change. Given their situation, swift action is essential. This isn’t merely a case of time is money – this is truly a question of survival. We need to keep reminding ourselves of that.
Half of Germany’s international climate-related funding is being channelled into adaptation to the climate change already taking place, with a view to supporting other countries. During our G7 Presidency two years ago, we launched an initiative to create insurance policies for developing countries hit especially hard by climate change. We would now like to expand this project into a global partnership during our G20 Presidency. Much would be achieved if the various governments were to all pull in the same direction. It goes without saying that we’d be fighting a losing battle if we were to act alone. We always need many stakeholders on board. That’s why local councils, NGOs and companies are invited to the Climate Conference in Bonn. They will present a wide variety of approaches and measures to climate change mitigation in an effort to learn from each other and also to find others beyond their own circles prepared to follow in their footsteps. For it’s clear that we need a global alliance of all states in which, what’s more, all sections of society are included. This is about a comprehensive transformation towards the most sustainable possible lifestyle – in social, ecological and economic terms. That’s why the Paris Agreement is closely linked with the 2030 Agenda.
Our revised German Sustainable Development Strategy includes the global goals for sustainable development. Our aim is to look at the economy, the environment and social issues together and to take interdependences into account in our decisions. These decisions range from the purchase of everyday goods to long-term private and public investment – whether, for example, they concern the modernisation of infrastructure or the transformation of energy systems.
The OECD – and I’d like to express my thanks to Mr Gurría and his staff – has drawn up a study on “Growth, Investment and the Low-Carbon Transition”. According to this document, we will have to increase investment in sustainable infrastructure – transport, energy, telecommunications – by roughly ten percent around the world in the next 15 years if we are to meet the two-degree target. The OECD believes that this extra expenditure can be recouped. For using more efficient technologies will save costs. Of course, cost avoidance due to fewer burdens resulting from climate change also has to be taken into account. The OECD has even come to the conclusion that we could achieve more growth through a common climate policy for all G20 states. In Germany, we’ve already seen that prosperity and sustainability can indeed go hand in hand. This is demonstrated, among other things, by a wide range of efficiency technologies which have made many of our companies leaders on the global market.
Nevertheless, this is about huge sums which have to be found before they can be redirected towards sustainable investment. The state level alone will quickly reach its limits. That’s why we need more private investment. The more companies take part in this, the quicker we’ll advance towards better climate protection. The energy transition in Germany shows that despite the great effort involved, advancing along this path is worthwhile. Once a start has been made, once the breakthrough of a new technology has been achieved, then costs go down. That’s an important lesson. The technological know-how gained can then benefit poorer countries which still lack their own research and development capacities.
There have already been palbable results: the price of energy generated from renewable energies has fallen considerably around the world. The United Arab Emirates is one example. Solar installations have been built there which produce energy for three US cents per kilowatt-hour. There’s a similar situation in Morocco with regard to wind farms. In Germany, we’re relying more and more on tenders when it comes to promoting renewable energies. In the case of photovoltaic systems, costs are starting to fall further. The first round of bids for off-shore wind farms far surpassed our expectations. Some bids don’t even require promotion. When I think back to how we supported the first ten gigawatts, then I realise how much leeway we have. We can now say that around one third of the energy consumed in Germany is generated from renewable energies. Despite their rapid expansion, the security of supply continues to be guaranteed. 
However, there’s no denying that we still have a few challenges to master. For instance, we have more possibilities to generate energy than we have to store or transport it. That means that the bottleneck in Germany is no longer due to power generation but quite clearly due to the question as to how we get the energy to where it’s needed and how to better store it. Those who succeed in future in finding ways to store energy will have a broad range of uses for their know-how.
Of course, we not only need progress in the energy sector but also in all other spheres – for example, buildings or transport. The spread of digital technology opens up new opportunities. Connected mobility in local and long-distance public transport, car sharing, autonomous vehicles – all of this can foster sustainable mobility. Smart electricity meters help consumers to better monitor and control their power consumption. The ecological and economic benefits of these new technologies are evident: consumers use less energy and resources and save money. This creates substantial market opportunities for providers.
However, I don’t want to paint too rosy a picture. It takes considerable effort to put any innovation into practice, even in a highly developed country like Germany. In the case of smart electricity meters, people wonder: what does the electricity company know about me; what about data protection? We have questions on insulation, about which we’ve been discussing promotion instruments for a very long time but have never been successful across the board. However, progress has been made – sometimes slowly, sometimes a bit quicker. I can therefore only encourage everyone to embark upon this path.
The development of renewable energies continues to advance around the world. There is good news to report from many countries. I’d like to give you just a few examples. China is the world’s biggest investor in the development of renewable energies. India recently decided to construct another 50 solar farms. This has brought the country closer to its target of generating 175 gigawatts of renewable energy by 2022. Kenya is currently building a wind farm with 365 wind turbines, which can cover up to 20 percent of Kenya’s energy requirements. It has now been possible to give two thirds of the population access to electricity. When I look at the number of African countries where access to energy is under 25 percent, then I realise that solar and wind energy presents us with a huge opportunity to generate electricity on a decentralised basis and thus enable many people to have access to electricity for the first time. Of course, I’m especially happy about the situation in Kenya. For during Germany’s G7 Presidency we advocated the active promotion of the development of renewable energies in Africa.
In the G20, too, we’re now focusing more on Africa. We want to mobilise more private investment within that forum, with a view to fostering sustainable development. However, it’s difficult to mobilise investment without any electricity. It’s therefore important this goes hand in hand. Even though advances in technology have considerably reduced the cost of developing renewable energies and even though electricity generated with renewable energies is cheaper than electricity generated from fossil fuels in many countries, starting capital is always needed to advance renewable energies, as well as climate-friendly investment in general. Donor countries, financial institutions, development banks and private stakeholders therefore have to play their part.
Private stakeholders in particular do of course need planning certainty for their investment. That’s why long-term strategies are so important, as called for in the Paris Agreement. For they can provide orientation for investors and, ideally, the maximum level of openness to new technologies. A total of six states have now adopted their long-term strategies and submitted them to the United Nations. They include the African state Benin.
Germany is also among these countries. With our Climate Action Plan we’ve set out the next stage until 2050: a reduction of at least 55 percent in greenhouse gases by 2030 and 80 to 95 percent by 2050. However, we still have much to discuss with regard to the details of this Climate Action Plan. We’re being careful to tackle these goals without exclusively focusing on specific technologies and in a cost-efficient way. The whole thing is an ongoing process, that’s to say there are regular adjustments. Here, too – as in the drafting of the Climate Action Plan – we have to ensure that the largest possible number of stakeholders are involved.
The European Union also has a concrete target: by 2030 it aims to have reduced emissions by at least 40% compared with 1990 levels. Every member state must play its part. A key instrument here is emissions trading, which we want to strengthen. Parallel to this, we mustn’t of course forget our economy’s competitiveness. For there’s no point if production is simply transferred to other parts of the world. Emissions damage the climate – regardless of where they are produced. I can therefore only welcome China’s decision to launch its national emissions trading before the end of the year. Then, as it were, we’ll have two major regions – the European Union and China – trying out this market economy instrument.
Of course, it would be best if the production of harmful greenhouse gases were to have a global price tag. A global carbon market would create incentives for the most efficient possible production and at the same time prevent distortions of competition. That’s why we launched a platform during Germany’s G7 Presidency two years ago to enable us to work together more closely. This is another issue which could be expanded to include the G20.
Ladies and gentlemen, I firmly believe – as does my Government – that there are no excuses; protecting the climate concerns us all. Firstly, we all feel the impact of climate change. Secondly, progress in protecting the climate will benefit us all. We’re responsible for each other. We’re liable for each other’s actions. We are bound together by a common fate. As the Summit will take place in Hamburg, we chose a maritime symbol – a reef knot – for our G20 Presidency. A reef knot grows tighter the more you pull on it, the greater the strain placed on it. Our motto is: “Shaping an interconnected world”. We cannot deny that our world is interconnected, nor can we call this into question. We are bound together by a common fate.
The spirit which reigned at the adoption of the Paris Climate Agreement must also be present today – as it’s implemented in Europe, in the G7 and G20 states and at the United Nations. I’m still trying to persuade the doubters. There’s always work to be done. But for now I’d like to thank you very much for your attention.


Nuncio,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,
State Secretary Steinlein, representing the Federal Foreign Office,
Mr Altmaier, Head of the Federal Chancellery,
Federal Chancellery staff,

I would like to welcome you all most warmly to the Federal Chancellery. I have to admit that this is the second year we haven’t been able to go to Meseberg, because it has been raining hard again, as it has in Berlin, and a garden party isn’t the best idea in this weather. But we won’t give up hope. We’ll have to see what happens next year. Nonetheless, we can still gather at the Federal Chancellery to talk about the political climate.

At the G7 summit in Elmau one month ago we debated current issues concerning the global economy and foreign policy. I would like to thank all those who attended. We had very intensive discussions not only in the G7 format but also with representatives of the outreach states, particularly on the subjects of counter-terrorism and the fight against Ebola as well as global health.

We in the G7 share common values - human rights, respect for the dignity of every individual, freedom, democracy, the rule of law and territorial integrity. Our agenda for action derives from these values. We want to create areas of freedom, areas of justice, areas of free trade with high environmental and social standards. In the G7 we discussed how we can all move nearer to these goals with leaders of international organisations as well as with our guests, as I already mentioned.

You are all aware of the great challenges we face. We live in a rapidly changing world. The global population is growing, but resources are limited. The question of how to ensure development opportunities for all is therefore becoming increasingly urgent. The answer, of course, lies in global economic growth that embraces preservation of the natural foundations of life as well as social responsibility. I am very glad that the G7 Summit also sparked ideas on this issue in particular. Yet it is of course clear that in the G7 there are far too few of us to make any great impact. We need many supporters outside the G7 to get involved.

For example, we can only embark on decarbonisation of the global economy if we all regard it as a joint task. The UN Climate Change Conference in Paris at the end of this year has to lay the groundwork for this. What happens there will show whether and to what extent the international community is willing and able to embrace the responsibility it has particularly towards future generations. I support UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and France’s President Hollande in their efforts to ensure that important progress on climate protection can finally be made in Paris.

The impact of climate change is particularly evident in southern countries, where it is restricting development opportunities considerably. It therefore makes sense for the new post-2015 agenda to combine the issues of sustainability and development. Germany is lobbying for ambitious goals in this area. Today the International Conference on Financing for Development, where Federal Minister Gerd Müller is representing Germany, has begun in Addis Ababa. To achieve the new development goals, all forms of financing are necessary - both public and private investment. All countries are called upon to do whatever they can to help achieve these goals, according to their capacity. This also makes economic sense, for we are experiencing on a daily basis that in the tide of globalisation the fates of the individual economic regions are closely linked.

We as the international community have a unique opportunity to create the conditions for eliminating absolute poverty within one generation – that means by 2030 – with an ambitious post‑2015 agenda. And let me say that Germany recognises its obligation to do its part in order to ensure that we do indeed achieve this goal.

Peace is and remains a crucial requirement for development. Yet we are currently seeing a large number of conflicts, not to mention the human tragedies, that are setting entire regions back many years. Islamist terrorist militias are sweeping through Syria and Iraq in a trail of terrible violence. They are terrorising people wherever they manage to gain a foothold. The fact that in addition they are mindlessly destroying cultural property shows once again their ignorance and lack of respect for humanity’s great historical achievements.

Extremism and terrorism are threatening peace in other parts of the world, too. To counteract this we have to dry up support for extremism and terrorism. That means we have to back those who take an active stand against the ideology of intolerance and hatred. That means that in countries such as Syria and Iraq we have to support a political process that gives an equal voice to all population groups. That means that here in Europe we have to ensure that young people do not fall victim to radical ideologies.

We sense that the evil of terrorism affects us all. Even in Europe far too many young people are being lured into joining terrorist groups. In Europe, too, terrorists are wreaking havoc. Attacks like those in Paris in January target the essence of peaceful and tolerant co-existence. They are attacks against humanity.

We can also see the consequences of terrorism, war and the resulting loss of perspective, which find one expression in the large numbers of refugees. The refugee agency UNHCR reports almost 60 million refugees, displaced persons and asylum seekers worldwide – more than at any time since the Second World War. We know that in Europe we can only overcome this challenge through cooperation and solidarity. To this end we have formulated a comprehensive strategy which focuses on several areas simultaneously. Taking in the refugees requires more than the engagement of just a few EU countries; we really need commitment from the whole of Europe. We have already taken a decision on improving sea rescue operations. The refugee tragedies in the Mediterranean have to come to an end. We also have to put a stop to the evil and criminal activities of the human traffickers, who are only interested in unscrupulously exploiting the plight of helpless and vulnerable people. Above all we need to tackle the problems leading to flight and displacement. This requires better cooperation with the countries of origin and transit.

This presents us with significant challenges, especially with regard to Libya. Armed conflicts are hampering the country’s progress towards political stability. We in Germany and in the European Union could support a government of national unity, such as Mr Léon is trying to establish, with the entire range of tools at our disposal.

In Tunisia we have seen that progress leading to a stable democratic constitution is possible if influential political and social players demonstrate a willingness to compromise and reach a consensus. Yet we also see that this success is built on shaky foundations, as the murders in the Bardo museum and on the beach at Sousse have all too painfully shown. We stand by Tunisia at this time. We have promised to intensify our cooperation in the fight against terrorism and in the area of border security. North Africa as a whole will continue to be a focus of German and European foreign policy.

We want good cooperation with our neighbours. That goes for those in the south, but of course it also applies to those to the east. We continue to consider Russia’s annexation of Crimea in violation of international law. We are aware of the destabilising influences in eastern Ukraine. Russia’s action violates key principles of the peaceful order in Europe. That is why the sanctions adopted by the European Union continue to apply. However, we want to see a political solution. Germany and France, above all the French President, are striving to achieve this. We want to implement the Minsk agreements, for we know that otherwise a political process will prove very difficult. We want Ukraine to be able to re‑assume responsibility for shaping its own future. Ukraine can count on international support in this endeavour. Yet we do not want it to have to choose between moving closer to the European Union and forging good relations with Russia. In our view, both should be possible.

Last week I visited Albania, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. The violent conflicts in the 1990s have left deep scars in those countries, particularly in their relations with one another. That is why I am very glad that the conference on the Western Balkans held in Berlin in 2014 sparked a range of ideas, for a youth exchange programme and for regional transport projects, among others, as I was told several times during my trip to the Balkans. It is also a good sign that the prime ministers of all the countries of the Western Balkans have already met three times outside the framework of such a conference to discuss concerns on their common agenda.

The concrete results that have been achieved since last year are to be presented at the follow‑up conference in Vienna. The fact that we will have concrete results to present is good news. We know, as we saw once again on the occasion of the 20th anniversary in Srebrenica, that it is no easy task to reach out a hand to one another after the suffering of the past. But we in Europe, in the European Union, have learned from experience that there is no division between neighbours that is so deep and so wide that it cannot be overcome.

Seventy years ago the Shoah, that betrayal by Germany of all civilised values, and the Second World War came to an end. Germany had brought immeasurable suffering on Europe and the world. By the end our country was in ruins – both materially and, even worse, morally. In view of this history, the reconciliation with our neighbours, which engendered understanding, partnership and ultimately friendship, still seems like a miracle – especially the unique relationship between Germany and Israel, on which we are focusing this year as we celebrate the 50th anniversary of the commencement of diplomatic relations.

We have our partners and friends in Europe and the United States of America to thank for the integration of our country in the international community. Sixty years ago the Federal Republic of Germany was able to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. NATO remains the anchor of our common security to this day.

Allow me at this point to mention the tragic sudden death of Philipp Mißfelder today. We are all shocked. Many of you knew him as our Foreign Affairs Spokesman. Our thoughts are with his wife and two small children at this time. We will miss him greatly.

Ladies and gentlemen, this year we Germans are celebrating another anniversary: the achievement of German unification 25 years ago. It would not have been possible if our partners in the world had not had confidence in us and confidence in the Chancellor at that time, Helmut Kohl. The end of the division of Germany went hand in hand with the end of the division of Europe. East and West were reunited. I am looking forward to celebrating this happy moment in our history in the autumn.

In the past 25 years, in this quarter of a century, we have achieved a great deal. Germany has developed in a way that hardly anyone could have predicted. Yet the united Europe as a whole has made huge progress in the past 25 years. Our cooperation has a whole new quality thanks to the Maastricht Treaty and the Treaty of Lisbon, for example, and of course, last but not least, our monetary union. The decision to adopt the euro reflects the idea of European integration like no other.

Our goal is and remains for Europe to emerge from the European public debt crisis stronger than when it went into it. To this end we have undertaken a range of necessary measures, improved stability regulations, set up aid programmes and implemented reforms. Ireland, Spain and Portugal have been through a tough process, but they have been able to complete their aid programmes successfully. They have gained stability.

In recent days all eyes have been on Greece. Last night the finance ministers of the Eurogroup as well as the Heads of State and Government were able to prepare the ground and create the conditions for opening negotiations on an ESM programme for Greece. Before the German Bundestag can make a decision on this, we have of course to await the outcome of the deliberations in the Greek Parliament tomorrow and the day after. If the outcome is successful, we will ask the German Bundestag to give the Federal Government a negotiating mandate for an ESM programme of this nature.

Ladies and gentlemen, despite all the challenges we keep encountering, we should not lose sight of how precious the idea of European integration is. More than 500 million people live in a community of law founded on shared responsibility – in a community of shared values based on freedom, democracy and the rule of law. We benefit from this every day. We should keep this in mind, even though our discussions are sometimes heated. Diversity of opinion is, like the ability to compromise, one of Europe’s great strengths. In Europe, as in all other regions of the world, we generally do better when we talk to one another instead of talking about or past one another.

You as ambassadors are not only representatives of your countries. You also build bridges between our countries. You work to foster cooperation and help improve mutual understanding. In view of the many problems in the world, only a few of which I have been able to mention, your role as bridge‑builders and door‑openers is more important now than ever before. So please regard this reception as a special form of thanks to each and every one of you, along with heartfelt greetings to each of your home countries. Thank you very much. 
Professor Schwab,

Ladies and gentlemen,



I’m glad to be back in Davos again today. And it’s my impression that the snow looks more beautiful this year, rather than worse. I am delighted to greet you all – in particular those of my Cabinet colleagues whom I can see in the audience – and let me say that Germany is back with a stable government and that, after a rocky start, we are all willing to work together constructively.



You have picked a topic that is of paramount interest, namely shaping the global architecture for the fourth industrial revolution.



Your discussions will be influenced by two things, one of them being the Global Risks Report which is published before each Davos Forum, and which reminds us we face many significant challenges. Let me mention climate change and natural disasters, for example, as well as cyber attacks and associated challenges, and terrorist attacks. At the same time, there are numerous disturbances and uncertainties in the multilateral system. Taken together with the general challenges, this has also resulted in the lowering of growth forecasts by the International Monetary Fund. This gives rise to a situation in which I think it can fairly be said that this Forum can play its part in bringing more security into the system, instead of allowing insecurities to grow further after this discussion. For I think there are many people who want to strengthen the multilateral order.



If we look at the global architecture at the start of the 21st century, we see that it is still based in its essence on the actions taken following the end of World War II. We have the United Nations and we have other formats such as the G7, and the G20 set up later at the level of Heads of State and Government in response to one of the major crises which was ultimately also already influenced by the digital transformation, namely the big banking crisis of more than ten years ago. If we’re honest, we’re still feeling the repercussions of that crisis. It caused an incredible loss of confidence – in politics, but also in the economic sphere, particularly in the financial sector. The regulations we introduced – to better control the banks – were a step forward, but if you ask people in our countries, you will find that their belief in a stable international financial sector has been damaged quite significantly. Therefore we have to do everything to avoid a repetition of the crisis. If we look at the interest-rate policies of the major central banks, it’s obvious that we are still chewing on this crisis, that we are not yet out of the woods, and that we have limited our own room for manoeuvre in the future in the course of this crisis. This makes it all the more important to get back to normality as quickly as possible.



Secondly, we have major international organisations, such as the World Trade Organization, and these are beneficial to progress. This international architecture – the United Nations with all its subsidiary organisations, the International Labour Organisation, the World Bank and the IMF, as well as the OECD – have helped make the world a better place all in all. Notwithstanding all the problems, I would like to remind us that when the World Economic Forum was established in 1971, the global population was 3.8 billion, and 60 percent of the population lived in extreme poverty. The planet is now home to 7.6 billion people, and only 10 percent of them now live in extreme poverty. That’s still 700 to 800 million people, it’s true, but it marks a reduction both in absolute numbers and as a percentage.



One of the bright spots among our international decisions was, for example, the adoption of the SDGs, the development goals for 2030, and the fact that the international community has for example pledged to end extreme poverty by 2030. I am confident we will achieve this goal. The Global Compact for Migration and the Global Compact on Refugees which were adopted by the United Nations with relative unanimity are further bright spots. However, these two compacts also illustrated how the international order is currently under pressure and is being cast into doubt.



If we ask why this is the case, and look to the history of mankind for our answers, we find that the decisions underlying today’s architecture were taken roughly 74 years ago. That is, as it were, a lifetime ago. We have to be careful not to casually dispense with the knowledge and insights of the people who were in charge in the immediate aftermath of the terrors of World War II. Because back then those in charge drew what I believe to be the right conclusions, for example by establishing the United Nations.



However, we have also seen that international organisations are very slow to adopt institutional reforms. Just think how many years it took us to implement the quota reform at the IMF or to increase the capital of the World Bank. These changes were urgently needed because emerging market economies such as China and India had long since had a greatly increased impact on our world economy. If an existing system reacts far too slowly to change, the result is that other players make themselves felt, for example by establishing new institutions. That’s what has happened several times. The fact that there is now an Asian Investment Bank alongside the existing G20 format and the World Bank, the fact that there is also a Shanghai Cooperation Organization, which brings together China, India, Russia and other countries, and the fact that China is promoting a 16+1 format to work with parts of the European Union, this is, I believe, a warning shot which should tell us – or tell me, as an example of a western politician – that we have to do something to stop the fragmentation of the international architecture, that we have to be ready to reform the existing institutions to reflect the true balance of power in the world.



Of course we also know the world is currently very much divided on the question of how to move forward. In my opinion, we must not beat around the bush. If we want to reform existing institutions which set global benchmarks then we have to be on board and we have to accept the balance of power as it now is. However, another mindset is now also represented on the world stage, one which harbours basic doubts about multilateralism and which claims that the world works best if everyone thinks of themselves and puts their own interests first, and then an order will emerge which is good for everyone. I have my doubts. I think we should always understand our national interests in such a way that we factor in other countries’ vested interests, and thereby create the win‑win situations that are the prerequisite for multilateral action.



I see myself in the tradition, if you like, of the great sociologist Max Weber, whom I revere, who exactly 100 years ago spoke about the “ethic of responsibility” for politicians in his “Politics as a Vocation”, setting us guidelines and making the point that compromise is the result of responsible action on the part of politicians. When I hear, as I often do nowadays, that compromise is something that is not to be accepted, something bad, something negative, then I would like to respond unequivocally that no global architecture will function unless we are all able to compromise.



Even now, we are finding it difficult to reform and update the present system with its global institutions. But the question asked here at the World Economic Forum goes even further: We are now faced with disruptive developments, with a fourth industrial revolution – what does that mean for the architecture we have today? I for one stand before you as someone who values multilateralism and multilateral institutions and believes them to be indispensable if the world is to thrive. The key question is therefore where can we really set new benchmarks now?



In this regard, I could now make a somewhat tongue-in-cheek but nevertheless very serious comment: some things do still work out. On 16 November – I don’t know whether you noticed – a revolution took place in Versailles, France. The General Conference on Weights and Measures was held. As a result of this conference, the old kilogram, the ampere and other units will become obsolete and measurements will be redefined by natural constants. This truly is a revolution in the world of weights and measures. The international community came together to agree on this reform. On 20 May 2019, new definitions for all base units will become effective. As of that date, the prototype of the kilogram of 1889 will no longer shrink and we’ll always have a kilogram which has been clearly quantified. That should encourage us to carry on striving for reform and to engage with the ideas of the modern age.



The first major challenge that should be mentioned here is how we deal with data, how we evaluate data and how we clarify the ownership of data. We’re grappling with these questions in all areas. Secondly, in the world of big data, we’ve experienced a huge leap forward in the sphere of artificial intelligence. Here our task will be to put ethical guidelines in place. Thirdly, I’d like to mention the possibilities of genetic engineering and bioethical issues. Here too, we don’t yet have any global agreements. We have to find answers to these pressing questions. As yet, I don’t see a global architecture to deal with them. However, I cannot imagine that every major economic power is going to find different answers.



Just look at the two major poles when it comes to data processing. On the one hand, we have the United States. There, data is largely in the hands of private stakeholders. That makes it difficult to set down guidelines which determine limits. My view is that the rules we had in the analogue world cannot be simply cast aside in the digital world. Rather, we need clear guidelines here, too. On the other hand, we have China. There the state has extensive access to all data – even personal data. Neither of these two very different approaches is in line with my own ideas or those which influenced Germany with its social market economy, ideas that include the protection of privacy. For all its imperfections, the European Union set down guidelines on how to better regulate personal data with the adoption of the General Data Protection Regulation. That takes some effort; however, when the Industrial Revolution took place and people moved from the countryside into the cities, it was probably also difficult for them to carry around different sets of keys to open their own doors. These are civilisational developments which we have to go through. I therefore believe that we should certainly strive to protect a certain degree of privacy.



We’re also faced with the major issue of fair taxation in the digital world. I’m very much in favour of the proposals currently being drawn up in the OECD, and I believe that we can achieve greater fairness and clarity in the sphere of taxation if we combine minimal taxation with what the G20 Finance Ministers have come up with – the BEPS system. Of course, we shouldn’t by any means leave this to chance.



Since our difficulties with the NSA back in 2014 or 2013, Germany has tried time and again in the UN General Assembly and in the UN Human Rights Council to sponsor resolutions aimed at addressing the privacy of data in the digital age. North and South are working well together, as you might say, for Germany and Brazil are trying in cooperation with Mexico, Austria and many others to define ever more clearly how to move forward in this sphere. But I cannot deny that this has been a laborious process.



I was delighted when my Japanese colleague Shinzō Abe said here today that he would like to use Japan’s G20 Presidency to focus on data and to launch global data governance. I believe the G20 is a very good format in which to place this issue on the agenda of the largest industrialised nations on a comprehensive scale.



Naturally, it’s only possible for Europe or Germany to take part in the debate on what a global architecture should look like if we are a major player, if we are an economically strong player that is in a position to enforce ethical measures. For the reality is that you can only have an impact internationally if you are economically strong and able not only to analyse the problems and to provide moral guidance but also to speak from your own experience.



Coming back to my own country, to Germany, I can tell you that we still have a strong economy which, however, has been shaped to a very large degree by the industrial age. In our country, the manufacturing sector still produces much of our wealth. And the automotive industry certainly still plays a very important role in this generation of our wealth. If we look at the revolutionary development in the automotive sector then, of course, we can see there are potential risks: risks in terms of jobs; risks in terms of data management. For example, the question as to who owns data is of crucial importance. If, as it were, data always belongs to platforms then our prospects are less favourable than if they belong to the car manufacturers themselves. The fact that we in Germany, for instance, but also in Europe, aren’t able to this very day to produce battery cells ourselves is certainly a major problem for Europe’s future as a car manufacturing base. That’s why I remain convinced that we should make policy decisions concerning this industry – as we’ve already done in the case of chip manufacturing – and use our cooperation in Europe to close the gap in areas of technology where we’ve fallen behind. For I believe that we cannot simply leave a large portion of the value added in relation to tomorrow’s cars, for example in the sphere of e‑mobility, to other continents if we want to be a competitive player on a durable basis.



Germany faces three challenges of considerable importance to our future, which I’d like to mention here.



First of all, the energy transition – the issue of affordable but also sustainable energy which meets our climate protection objectives. I’m quite certain – and this, after all, is becoming more evident from year to year – that climate change is of huge importance to us and to the world as a whole. Industrialised countries therefore have a responsibility to develop technology which can also benefit others. That’s not because the CO2 emissions of 80 million people, as in Germany’s case, could have a great impact on overall global emissions. Rather, it’s because we have the capability to do so and because we have already emitted so much CO2 in the course of industrialisation. I’m therefore very happy to be able to say to you – even though it has an impact on our energy prices – that renewable energy is now the cornerstone of our energy supply in Germany and accounts for the largest percentage in our overall energy mix.



We will have phased out nuclear energy by 2022. We have a very difficult problem, namely that almost the only sources of energy that will be able to provide baseload power are coal and lignite. Germany has now phased out its own coal production. That means that subsidies have been discontinued. Lignite isn’t subsidised and is thus a relatively cheap but very CO22‑intensive source of energy. We’ve therefore set up a commission which is examining the phasing‑out of coal-based power in Germany and is now in the final stage of its work. Naturally, we cannot do without baseload energy. Natural gas will therefore play a greater role for another few decades. The dispute about where our natural gas comes from is thus a bit over the top. For, on the one hand, it’s perfectly clear that we’ll continue to obtain natural gas from Russia. However, it goes without saying that we want to diversify. We’ll therefore also purchase liquid gas – perhaps from the United States and other sources. We’re thus expanding infrastructure in all directions. However, I believe we would be well advised to admit that if we phase out coal and nuclear energy then we have to be honest and tell people that we’ll need more natural gas. What’s more, energy has to be affordable.



This brings us to a subject on which we in the coalition have resolved to do better. For, being honest, I have to say that compared with elsewhere in the world, we are far too slow with construction projects. We are too slow when it comes to the expansion of the grid – the generation of renewable energy requires entirely different transmission structures. We are too slow when it comes to our infrastructure as a whole. – I see our Infrastructure Minister here. – Our aim must be to become quicker, obviously without neglecting the rule of law.



The second point is digitisation. Here, too, it is a matter of infrastructure – but of very much more besides. One thing that particularly worries me – and this is something else we can only resolve at European level – is that we have fallen far behind in the platform economy. Maybe it’s the case that countries with a fairly saturated and relatively well-functioning administration do not feel such a drive to innovate as developing countries and emerging economies do. In particular, nothing the state does with its citizens is anywhere near as digitised as it should be. So we plan to ensure that all administrative services are available to our citizens in digital form as well, by 2022 at the latest. Here, too, though, we really are not up with the frontrunners at European level. We’re actually a bit behind.



I think the digital transformation is going really well in our big companies. Things are getting better in SMEs; B2B is working really quite well. But business-to-customer is where it all unravels. Here we are in a competition. That is absolutely clear. And it is a competition that will decide whether those who operate the platform or those who offer the product gain the value added, as it were. I don’t think this battle is over, certainly not from the German perspective. We can win it, but we will have to be fast.



The third point is demographic change in Germany. Here, freedom of movement within the European Union is a big help. But on top of this we in Germany have now decided – after decades of discussion, it has to be said – to adopt an immigration act for skilled workers. Of course, this also means that we will have to manage migration better. Here, too, though, we have made considerable progress in recent years.



We have seen, ladies and gentlemen, – and here I’m adding a fourth point – that we can only truly move forwards if we stop believing that we can go it alone. The war in Syria and terrorism in Iraq have shown us how globalisation is reaching us in Europe and especially in Germany too, in the form of many refugee flows. That is why I am very proud to be able to say that Germany is one of the major donors helping to bring stability to the arc comprising Syria, Jordan and Lebanon. For we know that it is much better if people can stay in their home countries and not fall into the hands of human traffickers. Our development, too, goes better, if we provide help on the spot. That is why our focus will be on this region, but also on partnership with Africa. That is why we did so much with Africa during our G20 presidency.



Let me say this once again: from the European perspective, Africa is often regarded as a problem continent. But if we take a look at how Africa, a huge continent which will have two billion inhabitants in 2050, is gradually expanding multilateral cooperation and strengthening its African Union and regional associations, at how it intends to introduce freedom of movement and at how it has a clear idea of future infrastructure projects, then we also have to regard Africa as a continent of opportunities. This applies particularly to us Europeans, Africa’s neighbours.



And so a clear commitment to multilateralism, even if it takes courage, is a fundamental prerequisite for our policymaking. It is also well worth bringing together like-minded countries across the world. Because anything else will end in misery. With this in mind, Germany sees its future firmly within the European Union. Because the European Union can generate the necessary energy to move things forward.



However, we are now having to come to terms with the shock of the United Kingdom wanting to leave the EU. I am directing all my thoughts and energies to finding an orderly solution in which we can have a good partnership for the benefit of all. We are absolutely dependent on cooperation with the British in matters relating to internal security, external security and defence. But we are also a trade area – and the closer and the less complicated our relations are, the better. But of course this is also up to the UK.



Within the European Union, we have always championed free trade. And I am pleased that the EU‑Japan Economic Partnership Agreement is entering into force on 1 February. We are also committed to trade talks with the United States of America. We have concluded the trade talks with Canada. And I believe more should follow – with Singapore and Australia, if possible also MERCOSUR and others.



Ladies and gentlemen, we in Europe have decided to take the huge step of saying that in future we also want to combine our defence capabilities. This is also a question of our vision of ourselves. This joint strategic agreement to consider defence policy together is not directed against NATO. In fact, it can make things easier for NATO, because today we have over 170 different defence systems or weapons systems. The US has, I believe, fewer than 60. You can imagine the resulting loss in efficiency with respect to training and maintenance.



Germany and France’s decision to build combat aircraft together in future, to build tanks together, is, of course, a very important strategic decision – just as yesterday’s signing of the Treaty of Aachen between Germany and France as the continuation of the Élysée Treaty is a commitment, a commitment in an age of many uncertainties. It is a commitment that says yes, we want to play our part as important partners in Europe and to further develop the European Union. Yesterday I found it very moving that not only did the French President and the German Chancellor sign a treaty, but that this was done in the presence of the Commission President, the President of the European Council and the rotating Romanian Presidency of the Council of the European Union. This was intended to make it very clear that we want to help to strengthen Europe.



But let me tell you that, for historical reasons, we Germans do still have our difficulties with multilateralism. Agreeing arms export guidelines with France, for example, is a huge task. But it has to be done, because no‑one will want to develop weapons systems with us if they are not sure they can sell them later. In other words, and I want to say this unequivocally, it is not the case that I always find multilateralism easy because it is always easy. On the contrary: it is difficult. But then I always have to ask myself: what is the alternative, and what will it mean? We can see it in all of our countries: the challenges posed by populism, the emergence of nationalist forces. We have to square up to these challenges. But perhaps that makes the battle lines clearer and stronger.



That is why I and my colleagues in the German cabinet will champion a multilateral order which does not end at the European Union, but which is capable of giving really good responses to the new global challenges. However, that means that we must take care not to ruin the existing order so much that no‑one believes in the validity of new parameters any more. So I am delighted to have had the opportunity to speak to you on this note today.



Thank you.
Mr Kagame, Chairperson of the African Union,

Presidents and Prime Ministers from Africa,

Federal Chancellor Kurz on behalf of the European Union,

Christine Lagarde,

President Kim,

Mr Faki, Chairperson of the African Union Commission,

President Adesina,

Ladies and gentlemen and

Cabinet colleagues,



I’d like to bid you all a very warm welcome. This isn’t a routine meeting. Rather, it’s something quite special. I can say from Germany’s perspective – the situation would be very different in France – that this is the largest meeting of Heads of State and Government with African Presidents in the history of the Federal Republic of Germany. The fact that so many of us have come together here today underscores the importance of this meeting, which follows on from last year’s conference. At that time, Germany held the G20 Presidency. It was the idea of the then German Finance Minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, to enter into a partnership with Africa in the form of a Compact with Africa. Then the Development Minister had the idea of creating special development partnerships. I’d therefore like to extend an especially warm welcome to the current German Finance Minister and the Development Minister, who are sitting here upfront.



As you can see, all of us have committed to a partnership with Africa. Why is Africa so important to us? It’s important to us because we’re neighbours, as you can see on a world map, and because we therefore have a vested interest in ensuring that not only we in Europe but also the entire African continent is thriving. In some ways, Africa is a very rich continent. Just think of its natural resources and, above all, young people – of whom there are not so many in Europe. Africa also has a rich history and a wonderful culture. From a business point of view, I believe we can say that Africa is the continent with the greatest potential for development. That means that anyone who wants to do business on the continent should get started as soon as possible.



However, I don’t want to gloss over the difficulties. For there are problems in many African countries, in which people are very poor, in which not everyone has access to electricity, to water or other basic necessities. You all face the pressure of the high expectations of young people in your countries. It’s therefore important to talk openly and frankly about the problems, about the progress made and about the opportunities offered by our cooperation.



The Compact with Africa initiative also tackles the preconceived ideas which some companies have about investing in Africa because they’re often unfamiliar with the continent and don’t know how to get loans, how much legal certainty they can expect, how much bureaucracy there is or to what extent they may have to deal with corruption. These and many other questions mean that some companies are unsure whether they should do business in Africa, in your countries.



Therefore, in our view, the aim of the Compact with Africa is twofold. On the one hand, it is intended to lead to higher standards and more transparency, particularly in your finances. In return, we can offer better investment conditions for our companies. This morning I told the Investment Summit that in this legislative term we have set up a fund of one billion euros with a view to supporting small and medium-sized enterprises from Germany or Africa. In the case of countries where conditions are better and more transparent, more favourable conditions could be given for credit guarantees. That will then result in a higher volume of investment. It’s no coincidence that direct investment is higher in the Compact with Africa countries than in other African countries. We hope that this will continue to pay off.



Well, the G20 Presidency only lasts one year. After that, there’s a danger that everything will be forgotten. I’m therefore very grateful to the IMF, the World Bank and also the African Development Bank for saying that they would continue to shoulder responsibility within the framework of this initiative. For it’s not hard to understand that the issues involved cannot be resolved within a year. Rather they have to be dealt with on an ongoing basis. I therefore very much welcome what these institutions are doing. Japan will assume the G20 Presidency next year. And that country, too, will continue to address these issues.



I’ve invited Federal Chancellor Sebastian Kurz to be with us today because Austria’s European Union Presidency has also focused on Africa and will hold a conference focusing on the continent in December. We want to work closely together to avoid any duplication or even triplication of effort. For we should know what each other are actually doing.



It goes without saying that the more attractive conditions are in your countries, the better it will be for investment and trade, as well as for education and vocational training. One issue which has been very much on our minds and about which we’ve learned a lot during the last few years is what a modern development policy can look like. For a long time, we in Germany shaped development policy solely in collaboration with NGOs. That’s not enough. Although they run local and very good projects, these projects very seldom result in sustainable economic development. The first person who pointed this out to me many years ago was Kofi Annan who said that we had to focus more on small and medium-sized enterprises and on economic investment, naturally also with the aim of ensuring sustainability. Then we in Germany developed the GIZ further. Nowadays, the ministries – from the Federal Foreign Office to the Economics Ministry, the Environment Ministry and the Development Ministry as well as the Finance Ministry – cooperate very closely with each other and try to design fit-to-purpose packages.



I also want to say quite frankly that of course we’ve also looked to see what China is doing. China approaches your countries with very compact investment offers. And naturally you say that if dealing with Europeans always means first of all gathering together financing from various sources then it’s better to accept other offers. We’ve thus learned something from observing China, especially as it has experienced remarkable development during the last few years and thus knows very well how to leave poverty behind and increase prosperity.



I don’t want to repeat what I said this morning. I merely ask that whenever you negotiate a double taxation agreement with the Finance Ministry: let’s try to accelerate the whole process. That’s good for both sides and creates a substantial degree of certainty for our companies.



I’d like to conclude by asking you to talk about what’s important to you in your statements. Moreover, I’d like to point out that this meeting is being streamed live and that your remarks are thus accessible to a wider public. However, that doesn’t mean that you cannot also make critical comments. We want to learn from one another today. We don’t want to simply say nice things to each other. If we’re going to spend so much time together then our discussion has to produce results of value to us all.



Those were my words of welcome. I now ask President Kagame to speak first on behalf of the African Union and then Sebastian Kurz, who – as Austria’s Federal Chancellor – will look ahead to his High-Level Forum Africa-Europe in December.

Federal President,

President of the Bundestag,

President of the Bundesrat,

Mr Schuster,

Excellencies,

Esteemed colleagues from the Cabinet, Federal Government and Regional Parliaments,

Guests of honour,



Eighty years since the pogrom night – why, ladies and gentlemen, am I talking to you about this today? The first, obvious answer is the simple fact that this pogrom night took place 80 years ago today, and it is a matter of decorum for the Federal Chancellor also to reflect on these events on a day of remembrance. The events of the November pogroms in 1938 were an important watershed on the path towards the betrayal of all civilised values that was the Shoah. The consequence of this were six million murdered Jews and the unspeakable suffering of millions more people. There is no way to express all of this suffering. Words fail me here.



This is why I am speaking to you today primarily for another reason. I am speaking to you because these historical events – the betrayal of all civilised values that was the Shoah – were unique, singular, that is to say unprecedented in all of their abominable facets, culminating in – put in a cynical way – factories for industrialised mass murder or – put precisely – concentration camps and death camps. I would therefore like to use this day and this opportunity to think about three questions together with you: how did this happen? How did the majority of the population respond? What lessons can we learn from this?



Ladies and gentlemen, 9 November 1938 was one of a series of days and nights during which National Socialism showed its terrible face. Around 1400 synagogues, prayer rooms and Jewish meeting places were plundered, destroyed and set ablaze. Some 7500 shops were smashed and looted. Neighbours became perpetrators and criminals. Many people enriched themselves, welcomed the violence or engaged in violent acts themselves.



Anti-Semitism had been the order of the day since 1933. The new political conditions allowed many Germans to indulge long-held resentments, hatred and violence. This did not stop with the destruction of Jewish synagogues, shops and livelihoods. In November 1938, around 400 people were murdered or driven to commit suicide. Some 30,000 Jews were imprisoned in concentration camps; hundreds of them were murdered. The November pogroms were a milestone on the road to the Holocaust.



Ladies and gentlemen, we tend at important commemorative events to focus our minds exclusively on these days and all too easily overlook the fact that they usually do not happen in isolation, but are part of a wider process. And 9 November is no exception here. We all know what happened thereafter – namely the betrayal of all civilised values that was the Shoah. And yet the pogrom night of 9 November 1938 was preceded by something without which it would not have been possible. It is worth taking a look back at history in order to understand this. This can, of course, only be a very cursory glance in the context of such a speech.



Hatred for the Jews or anti-Semitism has existed in Europe since the Middle Ages. Until well into the 19th century, this hatred was primarily religious. At the end of the 19th century, with the Industrial Revolution, social issues became pressing and the secular nation states gained in importance. It was in this context that what was termed racially motivated anti-Semitism emerged, one bent on racist exclusion, expulsion and, ultimately, annihilation. In the Weimar Republic, Jews were, from 1919 onwards, allowed to assume the highest offices of state for the first time. Anti-Semitism nevertheless remained the order of the day – particularly among those who were hostile to democracy.



As early as 1920, the NSDAP published its so-called doctrines and principles of anti-Semitism, which intended to preclude Jews from becoming citizens. In the 1920s, when the NSDAP formulated these demands, many events were indicative of the rising tide of anti-Semitism – in both words and deeds – such as the murder of Reich Foreign Minister Walther Rathenau in 1922 and the attacks on Jews in Berlin’s Scheunenviertel in 1923.



Even from this brief historical summary, we can see that the evil of National Socialism did not come about overnight at all, but grew steadily. Ladies and gentlemen, why am I talking in such detail about all these things that happened before 9 November 1938, 85, 90 and 95 years ago?



I do so because I firmly believe that we can only learn the right lessons for us today and in the future if we consider the November pogroms of 1938 to be part of a process that was not only followed by the terrible chapter that was the Shoah, but also had a pre-history.



Because in this way we can see what the consequences are if – as under National Socialism – what was once punishable behaviour is first tolerated and then, ultimately, declared to be desirable behaviour. Prejudices that had previously or always been held could now give way to open violence with impunity. This was accompanied by a large majority of the German population looking the other way, remaining silent and indifferent and, above all, going with the flow.



The political conditions changed with the liberation of Germany in May 1945 and the new start that ensued. The normative delineation of racism and anti-Semitism was fundamental. However, racism, anti-Semitism and prejudice did not simply disappear.



If we today – 80 years after the November pogroms and almost 70 years after the founding of the Federal Republic of Germany – consider the situation today, then the picture is a mixed one. Germany is home once again to a flourishing Jewish community – an unexpected gift following the betrayal of all civilised values that was the Shoah. However, we are, at the same time, witnessing a worrying anti-Semitism that threatens Jewish life in our country and other places in the world that we believed to be safe. This anti-Semitism is, to an increasing degree, being openly unleashed in the form of at times uninhibited hate-speech on the internet, and in the public sphere in general.



Unfortunately, we have almost become accustomed to the fact that each and every Jewish institution – synagogues, schools, kindergartens, restaurants, cemeteries – must be guarded or afforded special protection by the police. We are also frightened by attacks on people who wear a kippah, and were aghast at the right-wing extremist attack on a Jewish restaurant in Chemnitz back in August. This is a form of anti-Semitic crime that evokes frightening memories of the beginning of the persecution of the Jews in the 1930s.



However, such incidents must not only be a cause for concern for the survivors of the Shoah – they are terrible for all of us. But our horror and disbelief are not enough. The appointment of a Federal Government Commissioner for Jewish Life in Germany and the Fight against Anti‑Semitism – as right and understandable as this is – is likewise not the end of the story. We must ask ourselves two pressing questions here. Firstly, what have we really learned from the betrayal of all civilised values that was the Shoa? Secondly – and related to the first question – are our democratic institutions strong enough to prevent anti-Semitism from continuing to gain traction, or even from becoming acceptable among the majority of the population in the future?



Perhaps we might pause for a moment and reflect what people from a distant future – maybe, shall we say, in the next century – might make of our world of today; a world that is at risk once again of losing sight of the common good because it excludes people, disputes their rights or threatens them on account of their faith, origin or otherness. How could our world of today, where the way in which we interact with one another is worsening at all levels once again, be regarded from the standpoint of a distant future? Probably with complete incomprehension; and perhaps also with a sense of pity for us today that we are still, and once again, at risk of repeating terrible mistakes and having to learn where the attempts of the few to divide us can lead.



Our Basic Law draws the conclusion from the horrors of National Socialism and the failure of the Weimar Republic when it states the following in Article 1, paragraph 1: “Human dignity shall be inviolable. To respect and protect it shall be the duty of all state authority.” This must be the immutable guiding principle of our actions; both politically and in society as a whole.



What does this mean in concrete terms?



Firstly, each and every person is unique. Groups must never be simply lumped together or our society subdivided into “us” and “them” or “us” and “the others”. Everyone has the right to be recognised and treated as an individual by state institutions.



Secondly, democracy is the very best of all conceivable social orders, even if it makes our lives complicated from time to time. Democracy is about more than winning majorities. It is about balance and achieving an equilibrium between majority and minority, government and opposition. It is about the separation of powers and requires the freedom of the press, opinion and art just as humans need air to breathe. Democracy protects minorities. This means the best possible participation in the life of society for everyone.



Thirdly, the state must take resolute and decisive action to oppose denigration, marginalisation, anti-Semitism, racism and right-wing extremism. The state must also undertake firm action when hatred of Jews or hatred of Israel is expressed verbally or non-verbally by people living in our country who have a different religious or cultural background. In concrete terms, just as there must never be a general suspicion against Muslim people when violence is committed in the name of their religion, it also follows that everyone who lives in our country must uphold the values of our Basic Law.



Fourthly, educational work must always place today’s anti-Semitic attacks and excesses in a wider historical context. Knowledge of history and a critical awareness of the past are indispensable to this end. Allow me to quote the historian Professor Norbert Frei: “This is not something that we have, but something that we must constantly develop anew.” With this in mind, each generation must strive anew to achieve a critically enlightened understanding of our past. Wherever this happens, Norbert Frei continues, historical remembrance will not be an empty ritual, but rather history will remain meaningful and new questions and perspectives may even emerge.



Fifthly, the work of remembrance has a fundamental role to play in this regard. At the award ceremony for this year’s Peace Prize of the German Book Trade, the prize-winning scholars Jan and Aleida Assmann pointed to the importance of our cultural and national memory. They describe our nation as “a union of people who are also capable of remembering shameful episodes in their history and taking responsibility for the monstrous crimes committed in their name.”



It is for this reason that pausing to reflect and remember together on days such as these is important. It is also important to realise that remembrance needs places that tell of what happened, and places that commemorate the victims and clearly state who the perpetrators were – such as the Memorial to the Murdered Jews of Europe at the heart of our capital city. Its underground Information Centre seeks to illustrate the dimensions of the Shoah. This is why many individual names are mentioned there in order, and I quote, “to dissolve the incomprehensible abstract number of six million murdered Jews and to release the victims from their anonymity”.



This is about people at the end of the day. Each and every one of them had a name, a unique dignity and identity. Calling to mind this identity and dignity helps us not to get bogged down in loss. It helps us not to decouple memory from our present-day lives, but to keep connecting with the past and, based on this, to shape the future – a future in which we recognise the human face in every person and in which we encounter one another as fellow members of one and the same human race.



Ladies and gentlemen, we are once again living at a time of profound change. Rapid technological upheavals are giving people cause for concern. Many people are feeling left behind by the accelerating pace of globalisation and digital progress. At times such as these, there is always a particularly great danger that those who respond to the difficulties and consequences of these upheavals with supposedly simple answers – simple answers that all too often go hand in hand with a brutalisation of language on the streets and the internet – gain in support. We must take a firm stand against the onset of such trends.



This is why we commemorate today with the promise that we will stand up to the attacks against our open and pluralist society with all due resolve. We commemorate in the knowledge that standing by and watching as red lines are crossed and crimes committed means, ultimately, that we are complicit. We commemorate in the belief that the democratic majority must continue to be watchful. We need to stake out normative boundaries. The rule of law must display no tolerance when people are attacked on account of their belief or the colour of their skin.



Ladies and gentlemen, reaching these conclusions is our task not only on such a day of remembrance. We should think about this each and every day. Let us all work each day with the insights we have today to ensure that events such as those that occurred 80 years ago never happen again. That is the message and the essence of our acts of commemoration today.



Thank you very much.

President Nakao, may I extend a very warm welcome to Germany to you and all representatives of the ADB. We are delighted to be able to hold this year’s Annual Meeting of the ADB Board of Governors in Germany. I think it really is high time Germany had a chance to host the meeting.

I would of course like to thank Federal Minister Gerd Müller and Parliamentary State Secretary Hans-Joachim Fuchtel for having done their utmost to make you feel at home here. That is certainly the impression I get.

Naturally I am pleased that we have some high-level guests here today. I would like to extend a warm welcome to the President of the European Central Bank, Mario Draghi. Mr Mayor, I think you, on behalf of everyone in the city of Frankfurt, are a good host. You have plenty of experience of conferences and trade fairs. But you also have major competition. You are aware of how dynamically the countries of Asia are developing. Frankfurt will have to work hard to keep up with all the other places around the world where the ADB staff here today are also gaining experience.

I would also like to welcome all the members of the German Bundestag and the parliaments who are here today, including, I see just now, local matador Heinz Riesenhuber, whom I will greet as a representative of you all.

Ladies and gentlemen, the fact that so many people are attending this meeting is an expression of our great determination to do all we can to ensure sustainable development around the world, to gradually remove inequalities around the world and to create decent conditions for everyone in the world – over seven billion people now.

The 21st century is often referred to as the Asian Century. If we consider the progress we have made in terms of the Millennium Development Goals, it is clear that this progress would have been utterly inconceivable without Asia. Here is one piece of good news at least in a world in which we hear so much bad news every day: since the year 2000, we have succeeded in halving global poverty. That we have been able to do so is essentially due to the economic upswing in Asia.

But the rapid demographic development and speedy economic growth in some places do raise a few questions. What form should development cooperation take? What is still needed? Should our commitment not be directed at other regions now, or is Asia still the focus?

We need to remind ourselves that, depending on how you calculate it, up to two-thirds of the world’s poor live in Asia. In other words, combating poverty is not yesterday’s news in Asia either, but a very topical issue. When we think that in 2015 we set ourselves another ambitious goal, namely to eradicate absolute poverty by 2030, then we know it will be impossible to do this without Asia playing its part. Just as Asia has been so successful in relation to halving poverty over the past 15 years, so we, and of course you in the ADB, want it to be successful in implementing the Development Goals over the next 15 years.

If a region is seeing dynamic economic development, it goes without saying that development cooperation needs to approach different aspects. It is not only the case that the Asian countries already account for one-third of value added in global GDP; they are also contributing one-third to CO2 emissions, for example. In other words, the countries of Asia are particularly affected by climate change, and by the question of how to arrive at a carbon-free existence before the end of this century.

Last year did see another bit of good news, of course: an international agreement was reached in Paris. Work to implement this programme is now underway. So our development cooperation, too, concentrates very strongly on climate protection and climate change mitigation, in other words on attaining the two-degree goal. At our intergovernmental consultations in India last year, for example, we promised support to the tune of 1.5 billion euros, one billion of which will go towards developing the use of renewables in India. We want to expand such forms of cooperation.

We, the industrialised states, have pledged to provide 100 billion US dollars annually as of 2020 to support climate protection in poorer countries. The Federal Republic of Germany intends to double its climate funding by 2020. The Asian Development Bank has announced that it will do the same. This shows that our goals largely coincide. Today we have together launched the Asia Climate Financing Facility. The aim of the Facility is to promote the development of climate protection projects as well as climate risk insurance, which we consider to be very important, and, above all, private-sector climate funding.

Last year, when we held the G7 Presidency, one of our priorities was to try to support climate protection projects. We launched a G7 initiative aimed at insuring up to 400 million people in the world’s poorest regions against the effects of climate change. I am profoundly convinced that insurance solutions like this will be very important in future.

At any rate, we need to move more towards realising that a combination of government and private-sector efforts is the solution. We will never be able to provide all the financing needed from the public purse, but instead need to use public money to find intelligent ways to offer state incentives, multilateral incentives for private investment. This was one of the things we talked about today, President Nakao.

The ADB and other development banks, for instance the AIIB, can set standards; they have the know-how and expertise; they can drive developments. The whole thing needs to be combined with efforts by the private-sector. The ADB is the world’s biggest regional development bank. The reform of the Asian Development Fund has given it greater room for manoeuvre. I believe this is a step in the right direction.

President Nakao, you personally did a great deal to bring about these changes. For that I wish to thank you most sincerely. Because the Bank is now in the position to work more consistently towards the agreed climate and sustainability goals and, in this context, to do precisely what I was just talking about, namely get private banks onside. I think we should regularly talk to each other about how the private sector can be better involved.

We were also talking earlier about how we can make the projects financed by the ADB more sustainable, more long-term. You need to be the trendsetter and, as it were, set benchmarks for the question of how long such projects are viable. Short-term action is no longer enough.

Let me assure you that Germany stands ready as a partner. What can we as a partner offer you? We know from our own experience in Germany that growth and energy consumption can be decoupled. We are convinced that competitiveness and sustainability can be reconciled, that they are not mutually exclusive. We believe that structural reform for climate protection will pay off in the long term and indeed even in the medium term. We have also proven that more efficient technologies can create jobs, resulting in employment and, in turn, in prosperity.

In many countries undergoing very dynamic economic development, we get the feeling that the people escaping from poverty and forming a new middle class have new demands when it comes to quality of life. Ultimately, there can only be a good quality of life if there is good environmental protection.

In our view, economic growth in the 21st century needs to be both socially and ecologically sustainable. You know that we are from the land of the social market economy. Ludwig Erhard is the symbol of this social market economy, which evolved from an economic theory to a practical model of society, a model of community life, in which everyone bears responsibility – not only the employers, but also the workers. I believe that this model is fit for the future and that we can apply it just as well to the environmental dimension.

Of course, in a social market economy you often hear this question: how can we create decent working conditions? That is why we, and in particular Federal Minister Müller, have taken up what is undoubtedly a tough challenge, namely watching international supply chains, such as the chain from the cotton plants to the t-shirts sold in the world’s rich industrialised countries.

Supply chains are something like bridges between poorer and richer countries. Given that we all know that the digital age, the internet age, is an age of transparency, we can definitely assume that it will be impossible to hide terrible working conditions in a country of production from the consumers in a rich country for ever. Consumers in richer countries increasingly want to know under what conditions a product has been made.

The subject of supply chains is one we want to take up in the G20 Presidency after our G7 Presidency and which we are already discussing with our Chinese colleagues, as we are cooperating in a troika. I don’t think we should let ourselves become discouraged.

One piece of good news I heard today is that in future all ADB projects are to be oriented to the agreed ILO standards on supply chains. Here the ADB is setting a good example and making these standards better known. We must continue along this path.

One last point I would like to touch on today is the subject of vocational training and expertise, which will become more important in connection with the issue of supply chains. I am pleased that the German Government and the ADB are cooperating on this too. How well are workers trained? How good is their knowledge? How well can they cope with new developments? How well are they protected against accidents at work? – I think there will be more and more questions like these in the next few years. Germany will be happy to cooperate with you on dual vocational training, as we call it in Germany.

Ladies and gentlemen, the few challenges I have mentioned today – climate protection and the quality of the environment, particularly in large cities, supply chains, fair trade, transparency regarding working conditions, fair sharing, training for people in all countries – are in themselves enough to show that you are facing huge challenges, but also that you are taking them up and facing up to them. That’s why I hope that this meeting will bring you to the greater attention of lots of private banks ready to enter into cooperation and that the ADB can engage in a valuable exchange of experience in its regional work for Asia and also of course across the bridges it builds to non-regional supporters, among which Germany is happy to number itself.

I wish you all the best and fruitful talks! Everything you do, every project you get up and running, helps us to combat poverty, helps us to enable more people to share in success. Germany’s experience with the many refugees who have come to our country is that if we do not tackle the root causes of flight, if we do not ensure development everywhere, then people will set off on journeys which are far more dangerous for them and far more complicated for us all. That is why I wholeheartedly wish you every success and a good meeting here in Germany.

I hope you will be able to take some time to enjoy Frankfurt and its quality of life. One thing you must do, I think, is try Frankfurt’s green sauce. That’s a speciality here. It has nothing to do with environmental protection, but is a concoction of herbs. So, whenever you get the chance, try green sauce and ask all about the ingredients.

All the best to all of you. Thank you.
Mr Donohue,
Ladies and gentlemen,

I am delighted to be in Washington again today and I am also very pleased to visit the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

This context serves as a reminder of just how closely the United States of America and Europe are connected with one another – on a social, political and an economic level. Our transatlantic relations are based on common values and mutual interests. We know that it is only together that we can overcome the great foreign policy, secu-rity and economic challenges of our globalised world.

A quarter of a century, or 25 years ago, the Berlin Wall fell and the bloc confronta-tion of the Cold War came to an end. At that time, some even spoke of the end of history. Yet now, 25 years later, most recently with the crisis in Ukraine, the post-war order in Europe is being called into question. This post-war order is founded on the principle of territorial integrity. Nearly 70 years after the end of the Second World War, borders in Europe are being altered in a manner which makes it seem as if the law of he who is strong is superseding the strength of the law. This is the case in the short-term at least, as we have been forced to see when Crimea was annexed by Russia. However – and I am convinced of this – in the end the strength of the law will prevail.

Still, that will require both patience and perseverance. Russia is quite clearly chal-lenging European and transatlantic unity and resolution to stand up for our values and interests. Our answer is clear – since the beginning of the crisis in Ukraine, Eu-rope and the United States of America have worked together – unitedly and reso-lutely – for a democratic solution which complies with the rule of law. In our efforts we have been guided by the principle that Ukraine and its citizens have a sovereign right to make their own decisions regarding their future. This applies as much to the country’s constitution as it does to the direction that its society will take.

The option of resolving the crisis with Russia by means of dialogue is and remains on the table. If however, the situation in Ukraine is further destabilised then Europe, the United States and all partners will not hesitate to adopt further sanctions. A cru-cial test – and this is something which I have also discussed with American Presi-dent Barack Obama today – will be the presidential elections on 25 May, which will take place on the same day as the European Parliament elections.

Elections in Ukraine which are free, fair and held by secret ballot could mean a new start, could create new legitimacy and could help to breach divides. They could pave the way for a process of constitutional reform which includes all Ukrainians. Anyone who wants Ukraine to have a positive future will help to ensure that the elections on 25 May take place in a safe environment. The OSCE plays an important role in this – both through its election observation mission as well as through the mission that we have set up especially for Ukraine.

Of course the matter of financial assistance for Ukraine must not be forgotten, and so it is quite right that the International Monetary Fund, the European Union, the United States and Japan have all pledged extensive financial support to the country.

But ladies and gentlemen, even if all eyes are currently on Ukraine we must not for-get that the transatlantic partnership also faces the task of resolving the dispute over Iran’s nuclear programme. With the Rohani Government in place, the E3+3 has a chance to reach a negotiated solution to this conflict. Yet, beyond having complied so far with the agreements of the Geneva Joint Plan of Action, in order to achieve this Iran now needs to follow its words with actions. If Iran fails to fulfil its obligations in whole or in part, then we are still prepared to repeal the current strictly-limited suspensions of sanctions and to impose new, further-reaching sanctions on Iran. That said, we should first give the negotiations a chance.

The terrible civil war that has been raging in Syria for the past three years also de-mands the close coordination of action across the Atlantic. This humanitarian catas-trophe has already cost 140,000 people their lives and has turned millions of people into refugees. The stability of the neighbouring countries, in fact the stability of the whole region is at risk and this is something that we will not tolerate. Germany is tak-ing part in the multinational escort operation to protect the American ship MV Cape Ray, where Syria’s inhumane chemical weapons are being neutralised. Moreover, some of the toxic chemicals will be destroyed in Germany.

Another reason why we cannot and will not tolerate the tragedy in Syria is because respect for human dignity, freedom of the individual, democracy and the rule of law form the bedrock of our societies on both sides of the Atlantic. As a matter of fact, these principles also spark debates in which we disagree, or further still, in which the transatlantic partnership itself is put to the test. This is certainly the case in the debate over reports of mass data collection by the American NSA in Germany as well as in other countries.

To state it unequivocally: everyone in a position of political responsibility knows that intelligence services carry out vital work for the safety and protection of our citizens. Now to make another unequivocal statement: we are responsible for protecting our citizens both from terrorist attacks and from attacks on their privacy. This touches on the very core of how we understand freedom and security.

We all know that in democracies, freedom and security have always been somewhat conflicting concepts. This makes it all the more important to continually re-assess the balance between freedom and security – above all in this digital age. The equi-librium between the two must be constantly maintained by justice and the law. In addition to this our citizens, quite rightly in my opinion, expect their governments to adhere to the principle of proportionality at all times when safeguarding freedom and security.

Ladies and gentlemen, let us not beat around the bush, in recent months we have seen significant differences of opinion and interest between Germany and America with regard to this issue, and these differences will not have disappeared after my visit to Washington, they will still be there. In fact they cannot be resolved solely at the level of intelligence services, but only through a political process in which we must take full stock of just how dramatically the digital revolution is impacting not only the work of our intelligence services, but how profound this impact is on our entire lives, our work and our economies. Today we agreed on a first step – a “cyber-dialogue” between Germany and the United States of America, and I am pleased that we are going to take this step.

We must face up to just how demanding the task is, of not only making use of the almost never-ending possibilities of the global flow of information, but of doing it in a way which ensures that in the future we can fully protect the human dignity of the individual. This is indeed what our democratic societies are about – the individual’s human dignity and, equally, his freedom and security. In a nutshell: not everything that is technically possible is permissible and the end never justifies the means. This is the spirit in which we conducted our discussions on NSA data collection and on the balance between freedom and security. We are doing this at home in Europe and it is also taking place between the United States and the European Union.

Yet in my view despite all differences, the irrefutable fact remains that Germany, Eu-rope and the United States of America could not wish for better or more reliable part-ners than those that we have in the transatlantic partnership. Transatlantic relations are of paramount importance to all of us and indeed they also form the foundation of our extremely close economic cooperation.

Transatlantic economic relations provide for a total of 15 million jobs on both sides of the Atlantic, jobs which are key to our prosperity. German companies alone have created over 600,000 jobs in the United States. American companies and their sub-sidiaries employ approximately 800,000 people in Germany.

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is an expression of a network of American busi-nesses which spans the globe. Since my last visit seven years ago the global econ-omy has changed dramatically. On the one hand, we have seen a significant in-crease in emerging countries’ clout in the global economy and in international co-operation – for instance within the framework of the G20. On the other hand, the international financial and economic crisis has had a profound and lasting impact on economic development in industrialised countries.

Currently – and happily – economic growth is gaining momentum around the world. The International Monetary Fund is forecasting 3.6% global growth for the current year and 3.9% for the following year. However we must not sit back in satisfaction upon hearing this. On the contrary – in Europe, the United States and in other in-dustrialised countries we are still facing serious challenges. These are excessive sovereign debt, stiflingly high unemployment in many countries, above all amongst the young, growing competition on international markets and the persistent vulnera-bility of the international financial system.

We will only be able to tackle these challenges if we cooperate closely and in a spirit of trust within the framework of transatlantic relations and of course multilateral insti-tutions – the IMF, the World Trade Organization, the OECD, as well as in the format of the G7 and G20.

As Mr Donohue noted, the Transatlantic Economic Council was established in 2007. It did not only make a contribution to smoother cooperation between American and European business in important fields such as electric mobility. Above all, it proved to sow the seeds of a project which many at the time considered to be pie in the sky – the project to launch negotiations on a transatlantic free trade agreement.

We have been in negotiations since last summer now. Negotiations on the Transat-lantic Trade and Investment Partnership, a key project within our transatlantic coop-eration. It will bring the European and American markets closer together than ever before, and it has the potential to strengthen them both. I am very grateful for the words that you chose to use: it is in the interest of both sides.

The European Union and the United States both already have a dense network of free trade agreements with third countries and are currently negotiating numerous further agreements. Now we must and will manage to reach agreements between ourselves and with each other in order to create a transatlantic free trade area. From our side we are quite clear that we want to achieve this by the end of 2015. This would clearly signal our determination to extensively remove trade barriers and would provide significant impetus for the development of the global economy.

Succeeding in reaching a truly ambitious as well as comprehensive agreement is crucial to this. Moreover, we want to abolish customs barriers between the European Union and the United States which are still in place but long out-dated. And yet we want to go further still, we also want to reduce non-tariff trade barriers as far as pos-sible. Over decades, a myriad of different standards and regulations have arisen on both sides. Companies involved in transatlantic trade often incur great cost comply-ing with such double regulation which does not present any identifiable benefit for our citizens.

Let me give you an example: today, a German mechanical engineering company which wants to export its products to the United States must design and manufac-ture numerous individual components specifically for the American market – from wiring to safety valves, despite the fact that their function and safety standards are identical. Naturally, this bureaucracy leads to resources being wasted, something which we could eliminate with a free trade agreement, enabling us in turn to use them to improve innovation.

In order to conclude a truly ambitious agreement however, we must go further than simply removing classic trade barriers. This is why we want to liberalise trade in ser-vices and the awarding of public project contracts. We want to achieve better coop-eration in developing innovative technologies and we want to better integrate small and medium-sized enterprises in transatlantic trade, as it is precisely SMEs in both of our countries that find it particularly difficult to branch out into the market of the other. For example this is the case for a German brewery from the Mittelstand, for whom even today, marketing its beer in the United States is nearly impossible due to high customs duties and onerous import regulations. I dare say you don’t know what you’re missing ...

Ladies and gentlemen, when negotiating the free trade agreement it is not only the competitiveness of our own firms that we have in mind. For us it is equally important to ensure that the agreement brings gains to employees and consumers on both sides of the Atlantic. They will benefit from the lower prices and wider range of prod-ucts brought by the common transatlantic market. For example, under the auspices of the Transatlantic Economic Council we have already reached an agreement on the mutual recognition of organically-produced food which has made trading organ-ic products of equal quality significantly easier.

I know that many people in Europe as well as in the United States are critical of or sceptical towards the negotiations on a transatlantic free trade agreement. We can therefore only achieve a successful outcome to the negotiations if we conduct them with complete transparency and the involvement of the public. This makes it im-portant for both negotiating parties to make it clear that a free trade agreement will not lead to the removal of regulations which protect consumers, employees or the environment. And of course there must remain leeway for new regulation to be in-troduced in the future.

Indeed the aim of the free trade agreement is not to serve the interests of companies at the expense of the interests of our citizens but rather to learn from one another and, in close dialogue, develop new standards to further improve their standard of living. If we succeed in this then Europe and America will be able to set global standards for better sustainability and consumer protection, because if we manage to conclude this transatlantic agreement, we will have unmatched power in the global economy which will put us in a position to determine the standards.

Our partners in the World Trade Organization are closely following the negotiations for the free trade agreement. I can assure them that our goal is and remains the most extensive possible removal of trade barriers – including within the multilateral framework of the WTO. We have recognised however, that at the moment, bilateral negotiations show most promise.

I believe that all progress in the negotiations for a transatlantic free trade agreement can enhance rather than limit prospects for progress in the WTO. The recent suc-cess of the WTO conference in Bali was a promising sign of a new spirit of coopera-tion within the organisation. Both the European Union and the United States played a significant role in the success achieved there, showing that our bilateral coopera-tion is in no way leading us to neglect multilateral affairs.

Ladies and gentlemen, trade policy can only be one building block in a comprehen-sive strategy to boost growth in our countries. In my view, it must come in addition to four further fields:

Firstly, we must get our public accounts back on an even keel once and for all.

The sovereign debt crisis in the eurozone clearly shows us that long-term prosperity can only be built on a foundation of sound public finances. We have certainly made significant progress in overcoming the crisis in the euro area – by agreeing new rules to ensure a stable monetary union, through successful rescue packages for crisis-hit countries and by setting up a European banking union. At the same time however, we know that the European public debt crisis has not yet been definitively overcome. The mistakes which were made when the economic and monetary union was founded over 20 years ago have not yet been rectified in a lasting manner. We must work on this and our aim must be to ensure that such a crisis in the euro area can never happen again.

Consolidating our budgets is an ongoing task. This is the case for many countries in Europe but of course also for our non-European partners such as the United States and Japan. It is also the topic of conversation when we talk amongst ourselves.

Secondly, we cannot slacken our efforts on implementing structural reforms.

In European countries as well as in the United States we are often faced with a wide range of different challenges – be it for the labour market, education policy or for optimal framework conditions for investment and innovation. Nonetheless, in all of our countries the fundamental task remains the same, namely to enable our compa-nies to hold their own in a competitive global economy.

Europe and America can greatly benefit from one another in this regard. Just as Germany and Europe are able to learn a great deal from the United States in terms of promoting young and innovative companies, I am also pleased that the positive experience that we have had with our dual system of vocational training has started to serve as a model in the United States.

Thirdly, we are both tasked with the challenge of guaranteeing a sustainable, safe and affordable energy supply.

We are very interested in cooperating even more closely with the United States in undertaking this task. We should indeed view the negotiations on the transatlantic free trade agreement as a chance to further intensify our energy relations. In light of the crisis in Ukraine, Europe is currently considering how to become less dependent on a unilateral energy supply, from Russia for example, and this is an area in which the transatlantic partnership offers a sterling opportunity.

Fourthly, it remains our duty to ensure that international financial markets are able to better withstand crises.

In this respect we have already achieved a lot – above all in the G20. Yet numerous areas still urgently need to be reformed. A particularly important aspect for me is re-forming shadow banking. We must reinstate the principle that if it gets into difficulty, every financial institution, regardless of its size, can be wound up in an orderly manner without recourse to the state. A certain amount has been achieved and a certain amount remains to be done. Europe has made a lot of progress in this re-cently, and America has been developing the relevant solutions for some time now.

Ladies and gentlemen, I am convinced that at the end of the day, we will only over-come all of these foreign policy, security and economic challenges together. For us, the transatlantic partnership is the key to peace, freedom, security and prosperity, and will remain so in the future.

We are all the more aware of this fact in 2014, in this important year of commemora-tion – 100 years after the start of the First World War, 75 years after the beginning of the Second World War and 25 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall. We must never forget what a treasure peace and freedom, peace in freedom, is. We have a respon-sibility towards this treasure, politically as well as economically, both in Germany and in the United States of America. This is what forms the essence of this wonder-ful transatlantic partnership. Thank you for your attention!

Your Majesties, Presidents, Prime Minister, colleagues, Ministers, Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen,

On 4 August this year the impressive international ceremony in Liège showed the whole world how Belgium commemorates the First World War: by mourning the victims and paying homage to their suffering, by uniting in commemoration all the nations that were involved and by taking an open-minded approach to the future. You have gathered us to continue that commemoration today in Nieuwpoort and Ypres.

I would like to express my heartfelt thanks for your kind invitation. As German Chancellor I consider it a special honour to have been asked to speak to you. Considering all that has happened, all the suffering inflicted on Belgians by Germans in two World Wars, starting with the invasion of Belgium by troops of the German Reich in 1914 – after all that, this invitation is by no means something to be taken for granted.

In August 1914 the Reich government and the German generals were driven only by a soulless military logic. The standards of civilisation were suddenly rendered null and void. Nationalism clouded all judgement.

The Belgians, led by King Albert I, put up resistance. The flooding of the fields of Flanders, which halted the German advance, remains a potent symbol of that resistance to this day. It also illustrates what an immeasurable sacrifice the war demanded. Soldiers and civilians alike were affected, not least in the martyred towns of Belgium.

With the first-ever use of chemical weapons by German troops in the 2nd Battle of Ypres in 1915, the threshold to a new level of cruelty was crossed. Those who survived these atrocities of war were left in a state of despair, fearful and speechless.

Ladies and gentlemen, all that was 100 years ago. As we commemorate these terrible events today here in the fields of Flanders, we cannot be grateful enough for how much has changed since then. After the Second World War, which Germany had unleashed, Belgians were among the very first to extend the hand of reconciliation towards their German neighbours. Since that time, for more than six decades, Belgians and Germans have fostered a friendship that is unparalleled. For that, too, I would like today to express my sincere thanks to the people of Belgium.

It is particularly appropriate that Brussels is the seat of the European Union. The EU stands for freedom, democratic values and respect for international law. The victims of those terrible wars enjoin us to honour that achievement of civilisation, to safeguard it and to stand up for it throughout the world. To do anything else would be to deny them the homage they are due.

Thank you very much.

Professor Turner,
Professor Mlynek,
Professor Eissenhauer,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

Thinking over, rethinking, thinking ahead – that’s what you’ve come here to do. The monumental installation by David Chipperfield, to whom I'd like to extend a very warm welcome, is a source of inspiration for this. I welcome all of you to Berlin, this city which has written history.

The Falling Walls Conference brings together the past and the future in a very special way. It combines the commemoration of the fall of the Berlin Wall 25 years ago with a look ahead at which frontiers can be overcome today and tomorrow. It combines experiences and the hope of a good, indeed a better, life in future – a hope fuelled in particular by science and research. The Falling Walls Conference thus focuses attention on a key prerequisite and driving force of human action. This was, is and will remain freedom.

Tomorrow we will be celebrating the 25th anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall. This day brings home to us that the human urge for freedom cannot be suppressed for ever. In the course of that fateful year, 1989, more and more East Germans overcame their fear of state repression and harassment. They exposed the fraud at the local elections. They gathered in churches to discuss openly. They founded civil rights movements and took to the streets to voice their demands.

On 7 October 1989, the SED grandees celebrated the 40th anniversary of the GDR with the customary pomp. At the same time, they ordered the security forces to harass people who were demonstrating peacefully. Despite this, just two days later tens of thousands of people gathered in Leipzig for the Monday demonstration. A line had thus been crossed. There was no going back. More and more people showed civic courage. It's thanks to their courage that the barriers at the border between the two German states were finally opened.

In contrast to 1953 in East Germany, 1956 in Hungary, 1968 in Czechoslovakia or 1981 in Poland, the longing for freedom and self-determination could no longer be crushed; neither in East Germany nor anywhere else. The human need to be able to take one's destiny into one's own hands turned the cruel division of Europe and the Cold War into a thing of the past. Today around 500 million people from 28 member countries live within the European Union. They live together in peace and freedom. Others would like to become part of our community. Our coming together under one roof is the forward-looking answer to the antagonism of former days.

The lack of communication, the boundless distrust and and cold confidence in military logic which prevailed one hundred years ago when the First World War broke out have become inconceivable. We are also remembering this event in 2014, as well as the outbreak of the Second World War 75 years ago. Both wars left many millions dead – both soldiers and civilians. They reduced our continent to rubble. They left a trail of unspeakable horror. We Germans will never forget that it was our country which broke all the rules of humanity during the National Socialist era. Due to the Shoah, that ultimate betrayal of all civilised values, Germany has an ever-lasting responsibility.

After all these horrors, Europe was not yet able to come together. The Cold War followed. Germany, Europe and the world were divided into two blocs. The wall which cut Berlin in two symbolised this.

25 years ago, in the days leading up to 9 November 1989, the growing protest movement may have led some to think it was vaguely possible that the Wall could fall. However, virtually no one could have imagined that it would only be a matter of hours. It is certainly possible to see a parallel to science in this. In this field, too, some things emerge with ill-defined outlines. But when precisely the breakthrough will happen and – above all – what it will look like exactly and what new possibilities it will offer, sometimes becomes apparent quite unexpectedly.

Freedom is a vital prerequisite and engine for this. Freedom opens up new worlds. Anyone who can think and research freely can better understand the bigger picture, can recognise new paths and is free to embark upon them. Or as the French author André Gide said, “One doesn't discover new lands without consenting to lose sight of the shore for a very long time.” Yes, it requires courage to gain freedom. And it also requires courage to take advantage of freedom. The Falling Walls Conference wants to give us courage, the courage to overcome the walls around current thinking, to cut lanes and open up new perspectives.

This year’s Nobel Prize Winner for Chemistry gave us a wonderful example which shows that what is seemingly insurmountable can be overcome after all. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate Professor Stefan Hell most warmly on his great success. His research focuses on nanobiophotonics. Thanks to his pioneering work, detailed resolutions which used to be considered impossible are now possible in the field of microscopy. Basically, he made visible what had previously been invisible. And this has quite literally opened up new and in-depth insights into living cells. This helps to better understand the causes of diseases and, ultimately, to devise targeted treatments.

Health research in particular illustrates very clearly how the pace of scientific advance can affect the standard of living. That’s also the reason why great hopes are often placed in science. To ensure that many of these hopes can be fulfilled, we have made the promotion of science a political focus – in the health field as well as in many other spheres.

We have devoted greater attention in health care to previously neglected diseases caused by poverty. For especially in the field of health research, developed countries like Germany with a strong research record have an international responsibility. That’s why we made this topic one of the focuses of our G7 Presidency.

When I say that, I’m also thinking of ebola, which has hit many parts of West Africa. German scientists are helping to find ways and means of halting the spread of this disease. However, we have to admit that we could probably already have a vaccine if we’d paid enough attention to this disease before the epidemic took hold.

Ladies and gentlemen, there is much I could tell you about what the Federal Government is doing in cooperation with the Länder to steadily advance science. However, rather than go into details, I would just like to say that we are always guided by the idea that only by breaking new ground, only if we are prepared to leave well-trodden paths and encourage people to do this, will we be able to maintain and increase our prosperity.

Ladies and gentlemen, the Falling Walls Conference undoubtedly also offers an excellent opportunity to showcase Germany’s scientific sector. I make no secret of the fact that we’d be delighted if even more top researchers from abroad were to come to Germany to research. Our universities and non-university research institutions have much to offer. We won’t content ourselves with cultivating our reputation as a country which traditionally produces poets and thinkers. Although we’re meeting in a museum today, our intention is not to merely look back. We want to gain a reputation as a country of pioneering thinkers.

For we know that innovation made in Germany as an outstanding seal of quality would be inconceivable without freedom. This also applies to vocational training. In the former GDR, for example, many were not allowed to study even though they were talented. A free state, on the other hand, fosters individual interests and abilities.

We welcome lateral thinkers, people who pursue new avenues. Everyone should have an opportunity, and everyone should take advantage of this opportunity. That’s what makes a country humane. And that’s what makes a country enduringly successful. That will remain the aim and yardstick of forward-looking, forward-thinking policies. In addition, there is a host of initiatives in which people who want to explore new paths, who want to overcome barriers, can come together. The Falling Walls Conference is one of these.

I wish you not only a lovely evening but also fruitful discussions tomorrow. Once again, I bid a very warm welcome to each and everyone of you.
Mr Mathur,
Mr Graf,
Cabinet colleagues,
Members of the business delegation, led by Mr Kaeser,
Ambassador,
Ladies and gentlemen,

I am delighted to be with you for a second time – this time in New Delhi – and to be opening with you what is now the 63rd Annual General Meeting of the Indo‑German Chamber of Commerce. The Indo‑German Chamber of Commerce has not only been active for a long time; it is also the biggest German Chamber of Commerce Abroad. And that is saying something, because there are over 140 of them, working in 92 countries around the world. That in itself shows that India and Germany are good and reliable economic partners for each other. There are some 1800 German companies operating in India. One must never forget – and I’m saying this to the German guests here today – that India is a continent of great diversity and regional divergence. So it is no wonder that many different kinds of German companies are active here. German firms provide hundreds of thousands of jobs in India.

I first came to India as Federal Chancellor in 2007. I was able to be in attendance when we waved the Science Express off on its journey around the country, bringing the world of science closer to young people in particular. Many companies were involved in the Science Express, alongside scientific institutions. I mention that because I see the Science Express project as a fantastic symbol of the diversity of Indo‑German relations – relations which we have been nurturing for many years and which were raised to a new level with the first intergovernmental consultations in 2011.

Yesterday we held the fifth Indo‑German intergovernmental consultations. My delegation and I received a very warm welcome from Prime Minister Modi and his Government. Intergovernmental consultations have the advantage of covering the entire spectrum of cooperation – from issues relating to sustainable development, our economic relations, innovation and the digital transformation to, of course, foreign and security‑policy challenges.

We have agreed to work even more closely together than hitherto on climate change mitigation and innovative technologies for more sustainability. We decided to launch the Indo‑German Partnership for Green Urban Mobility. We will earmark one billion euros for this over the next five years. What we intend to do, among other things, is put 500 new electric buses on the road in the state of Tamil Nadu and replace 2000 old diesel‑engine buses with more energy‑efficient models. Anyone who noticed the air quality in Delhi yesterday will doubtless be well able to argue that there is a need for even more electric buses.

We also want to collaborate more closely on the digital transformation and artificial intelligence. Here we have identified two areas which might be of great significance, if we get results. Firstly, the health sector, and secondly, agriculture. The Federal Minister of Agriculture is here today. You are all aware of how hugely important agriculture is for India. 50% of the population work in agriculture. Yields are by no means as good as they could be. The losses after the harvest are substantial. The entire logistical infrastructure needs to be improved. And a great deal more can be done to encourage cooperation among the many small farmers in rural areas. One has to recognise this: if nothing happens in the rural areas, people flood to urban areas, which then become completely overstretched. In other words, any move to develop rural areas is also good news for sustainable development in urban areas. That is why I think this is so important.

The digitalisation of agriculture will help not only to increase yields but also to make better use of fertilisers, pesticides and seeds, which will in turn protect the soil and the groundwater. After all, water is an issue in many ways here in India. The fact that the digital transformation opens up many possibilities in the health sector, too – for example, being able to evaluate huge quantities of data to gain knowledge for treatments – is of course clear.

So I am very interested to learn about the findings of the newly‑agreed Digital Expert Group, an initiative of German and Indian companies and research institutions which is to draw up proposals for joint projects and policy measures to be presented to the German and Indian Governments. Perhaps you as the Chamber of Commerce Abroad can take a more detailed look at our various projects and see whether there is anything among them for you, and perhaps where something more could be done over and above your own current engagement.

Ladies and gentlemen, German and Indian companies work together for many reasons; the motivations for German companies to be present here in India are many. Over the past 20 years the country has boasted an impressive growth rate of seven percent. The Indian market is not only enormous, but also very dynamic. That is why you are interested, and that is why I am accompanied on this trip by a business delegation, many of whom – with the exception of Mr Kaeser, who represents a huge company, Siemens – are from SMEs and naturally have to learn how to navigate India’s labyrinthine bureaucracy. That is why, at yesterday’s roundtable with Prime Minister Modi, we did not hesitate to speak very frankly about the various obstacles our companies come up against in India, but also about those which Indian companies find in Europe. Because Europe has plenty of red tape too. We will be talking to the European Commission once again to see whether it might not be possible to simplify certain things.

We believe there are good openings for German engagement in the further modernisation of Indian infrastructure, particularly the planned high‑speed rail links. We also want to help shape urbanisation, promoting smart cities and renewable energy sources. India’s renewables capacity amounts to approximately 75 gigawatts. But that is just a drop in the ocean for such a big country with its population of 1.4 billion. We have the same in Germany, with our population of 83 million. But it is good that a further 100 gigawatts are to be added in the coming years.

I am told again and again that water and waste management is a huge issue. Germany has excellent technologies to offer in this area. However, we have to say – this is what companies all tell us – that while everything already works really well B2B, when it comes to waste management in towns and cities, in other words when the customers are the inhabitants, there are a whole range of problems, because pricing certain public services is no easy matter when you are dealing with areas with very different lifestyles, backgrounds and incomes. In better‑off parts of town, you could certainly charge prices that reflect the services provided. In other parts of town that would be much more problematic. In Chile we saw how increasing the price of an underground ticket by four cents can very rapidly cause major social dislocation. This is certainly not a very easy matter. In the long term, however, environmental services, waste collection, electricity, etcetera need to be naturally priced, otherwise things will not work properly.

Now we know, of course, that good intentions alone are not enough. That is why we have established an instrument, the fast track procedure. When an investment stalls, a way to the Prime Minister’s office can be found via the Embassy or Ambassador Lindner, and then these cases can be examined to see what the difficulty is that’s holding things up. The German business community has said it would be ideal to have such an instrument in every state of India, because many decisions are taken at state level. We want to continue working on that. In addition, we need new rules to protect German investment. The old regulation expired in 2016.

What we need even more urgently – as I discussed in detail yesterday with the Prime Minister – is to restart the negotiations with the European Union on an EU‑India free trade agreement. At one point we were quite close to doing so, but then a few points of contention emerged, relating in particular to access to public procurement, and to agriculture. However, we have undertaken to make a fresh attempt with the new European Commission, not least because the Trade Commissioner in the new Commission used to be Agriculture Commissioner in the old Commission and is very familiar with the subject.

We, India and Germany, are firmly committed to the multilateral trade system. German Foreign Minister Heiko Maas and his French counterpart held a meeting on the fringes of the UN General Assembly for countries committed to multilateralism. I am happy to say that India was one of them. We want to strengthen multilateralism. Prime Minister Modi and I were agreed on this yesterday.

As a strong economy and populous nation, India is becoming increasingly prominent in international cooperation. Naturally this also means that the country has an increased responsibility in international affairs. We already work together in various UN‑led maritime missions. We have a shared interest in the development of Afghanistan. Obviously it is always also a matter of ensuring fair relations between states. Clearly this is only possible if states understand each other, and if they are willing to seek a fair accommodation of interests and to try to find solutions through dialogue. This represents a position which India embodies worldwide in the great figure of Mahatma Gandhi, whose 150th birthday we are celebrating this year. And so it was a very special moment for me yesterday when, along with Prime Minister Modi, I visited the last house Gandhi lived in, Gandhi Smriti. Thank you very much indeed for giving me that opportunity.

This year, indeed, we are marking several anniversaries. Thirty years ago, the Berlin Wall fell. Seventy years ago, the Federal Republic of Germany was founded. Two years before that, in 1947, India attained independence. And in 1951, Germany and India established diplomatic relations. These were important milestones. Since then, the Chambers of Commerce Abroad have done wonderful work. I wish once again to tell all of you here, and especially the Committee, that we very much appreciate it. Alongside the political Ambassador, you too are important ambassadors in India, this great country.

I can reveal that you might be facing even more work. Because we recently adopted an immigration act for skilled workers. I believe the fact that there are now almost 20,000 Indian students in Germany is in itself good news. More and more universities are offering courses in English, meaning that there is no longer such a big language barrier as there once was. Though we are happy about every student who decides to learn German. The Goethe‑Institut does a lot to encourage people to learn the language. You no longer necessarily have to be able to speak fluent German to do an apprenticeship in Germany. The first priority is specialist know‑how, and then your knowledge of German becomes more important and your skills improve. Our proposal is that the Chambers of Commerce Abroad be a point of contact for people who want to go to Germany as skilled workers, in other words that they act as a kind of job broker, and then fill out the visa applications in close cooperation with the Embassies. We all know, after all, that some people complain about how long it takes to process a visa application. In order for the immigration act for skilled workers to function properly, we want to introduce a mechanism that will work right from the word go as of March next year. We will be discussing this with the German business community at the end of the year. I can imagine there might definitely be a certain interest on the Indian side in sending skilled workers to Germany.

In 2022, India will celebrate 75 years of independence and in that same year will assume the G20 Presidency. Germany will hold the G7 Presidency then. We will have to think about what Indo‑German highlights we can arrange for that year. I would like to conclude by saying I at least am convinced that our cooperation has a great deal more potential. In 2030 India will have a bigger population than China. Following Mr Modi’s second election, India will strengthen its international role. India has a young population who want to live in prosperity but who also want to work hard.

And so you deserve our gratitude for creating jobs here, and for passing on your experience, hopefully while making money here in India. Of course we want that too. Let us work together to make relations between our two countries even stronger, even more vibrant and even more intensive. The political will is certainly there, as emphasised by these Indo‑German intergovernmental consultations.

Thank you very much for inviting me to be with you at the opening of your Annual General Meeting today.
Presidents,
Prime Ministers and Ministers,
Excellencies,
Professor Grosse,
Professor Liebing,
Fellow members of the Cabinet and the German Bundestag,
Ladies and gentlemen,

Let me start with a very special greeting for the President of Egypt, Mr al-Sisi, who is not only the Chairperson of the African Union this year, but is also celebrating his 65th birthday here in Germany today. Many happy returns, Mr President, and all good wishes on your birthday.

I am delighted to be opening this conference with you today, and particularly with the many guests from the Compact with Africa countries. I extend a very warm welcome to Berlin especially to the Heads of State and Government.

I would also like to express my sincere thanks to the organisers, the German-African Business Association and the Sub-Saharan Africa Initiative of German Business. Today we are meeting in the House of German Business, where the German business associations are gathered under one roof. So you could say we are right at the heart of the home of German business.

Be it peace, climate protection, economic development, migration or other major questions of our time – we all agree that Africa, with its more than 50 states and a growing population – indeed an increasingly young population – has an important role to play in tackling global issues. It is clear that Africans and Europeans are facing many shared challenges. This is why we have intensified our cooperation considerably in recent years – because we firmly believe that it is not only in the African interest, but also in the interest of Europe’s biggest economy, in Germany’s interest.

I have been able to visit some countries in Africa, but unfortunately nowhere near all of them, not even half of them. But I am pleased that African Heads of State and Government pay very frequent visits to Germany. I am aware that one always has work to do at home. So I am grateful that you have taken the time to come.

We are agreed that as well as engaging in development assistance, of course we need above all to shape the transition to a self-sustaining upturn. That was one of the reasons why we launched the Compact with Africa Initiative during our G20 Presidency in 2017. The aim is to increase private investment in particular in the participating countries.

We know that in the past few years the African states have set themselves a very ambitious agenda. The most recent highlight, I would say, was the African Union Summit in Niamey, in the Niger, where the final decision was taken on the launch of an African Continental Free Trade Area. I believe this decision, alongside the regional organisations which are already very strong and active on the African continent, was a landmark one. And I congratulate you on it. With the European internal market, we have a bit of an idea just how hard it is to get something like that up and running. There are customs barriers, but above all there are lots of non-tariff trade barriers that you have to wrestle with. We Europeans have to admit that even after many years of the European Union, we still don’t have a perfect single market.

All the issues relating to the single market are coming to the fore again now, not least in relation to the digital transformation. Yesterday the governing coalition was looking at digital issues facing Germany. We were joined by the representative of Smart Africa, who was appointed by the African Union to accelerate digitalisation, and who told us about what you have been doing in this area. It was certainly very encouraging. The yardstick for the initiatives is, in particular, your Agenda 2063, launched with the 100th jubilee of decolonisation as its horizon. Yesterday we also spoke with Mr Koné of Smart Africa about what digital sovereignty means. Because it is possible to become hugely dependent on others again even in the digital age. Data – the “new oil”, as it was called yesterday – might suddenly not belong to us any more. That is a problem that exists in Europe as well as in Africa. So that is a field where cooperation is definitely worthwhile.

Now we have the Compact with Africa. Twelve countries are participating. The idea was, is and will remain a G20 initiative. It is not, in other words, a purely German initiative: it is supported by all G20 states. But because it was launched during our Presidency, we are, if I may put it this way, a sort of patron of this initiative. However, its main supporters now include the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund. And indeed guests from those institutions will be with us this afternoon.

This initiative means, on the one hand, that the African countries themselves are taking steps to improve the transparency of their financial systems, to improve their tax systems and to improve debt management. So overall a lot is being done for better governance. We believe, I am firmly convinced, that greater transparency can also bring more investors into these countries, because it is very important especially for German SMEs or investors from other G20 states that there is confidence, that there is transparency, that it is clear what environment one is investing in.

On the other hand, we want to create incentives for the countries participating in the Compact with Africa, when they see some success, to grant our countries better conditions for investment. To this end, we have set up an investment fund. I would just like to remind you – as the fund was basically designed last year – of the pillars on which it is based.

The first is AfricaConnect. This financing solution is intended to help SMEs from Germany and Europe to finance investment in Compact countries. We launched it in June, and have already received over 220 inquiries. The first commitments will be made soon. And a few of these investment projects will be presented here today.

The second pillar is the Africa Business Network (Wirtschaftsnetzwerk Afrika), which provides German companies with tailormade advice on funding possibilities and on the economic and legal environment in African countries.

The third pillar is the AfricaGrow development investment fund. Through this fund and trusted African funds, we will provide venture capital for African start-ups – another very important element. I spoke only recently with this year’s recipient of the German Africa Award, Juliana Rotich, about the problems in getting loans locally. Now AfricaGrow gives African start-ups the possibility of easier access to funding.

In addition, we have made the conditions for export guarantees and investment guarantees more attractive. Since 2018, exports totalling 330 million euros to Compact countries alone have enjoyed Federal guarantees. Applications have been submitted for a billion euros in guarantees. So we are improving; we started off from a fairly low level, compared to China and other countries. We also know that foreign trade is often the precursor to engagement on the ground, for instance in the form of investment. That’s why these figures are definitely promising.

Furthermore, we have taken a look at how the Compact countries’ ratings in the World Bank’s Ease of Doing Business Index, which is important to many investors, have evolved over the past few years. And we can say that the ratings of the Compact countries in particular have improved greatly. Allow me to congratulate everyone on that.

So we can now point to a host of practical examples, and, should you want to find out more, you can have a look at the information in the atrium.

Of course, the decision to invest in Africa remains one for the private sector. We cannot take the decision for businesses. We can, however, help. We can create confidence, and we can say that conditions in the Compact states are certainly more transparent than they used to be.

In another step, we – in the form of Gerd Müller and his team at the Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Development – have entered into bilateral reform partnerships with some of the Compact countries, namely Ghana, Tunisia, Côte d’Ivoire and now also Senegal and Ethiopia. We can also say that the possibility of a reform partnership is open to all. We are talking about the conditions, and the Minister is speaking to many representatives of the other Compact countries too.

You will realise that there has been a great deal of movement; but I do not wish to paint too positive a picture, because there are still problems that need to be solved. These include the major issue of security, in the Sahel region in particular. Here we have different instruments to try and make security and development compatible. The challenges posed by terrorism are severe.

And then there is the matter of population growth. Africa has a young and incredibly proactive population. Basically the exact opposite from what we have in Germany. We talk a great deal about how many pensioners we are going to have in future. In Africa, though, they talk more about young people. That is why I am pleased about the cross-border special initiative on Training and Employment, which aims to create 100,000 jobs and 30,000 training places.

I would also like to remind you of the Federal Government’s decision to introduce an immigration act for skilled workers. From 1 March 2020, we will for the first time have rules on how skilled workers can move to Germany. As Mr Grosse has already indicated, our Chambers of Commerce Abroad will be the points of contact. We will join with the German business community to organise a large-scale forum before the end of December to consider what countries we want to advertise in for skilled workers, and generally how we are going to go about it.

Ladies and gentlemen, I am glad that my speech is not the main event this morning. Rather, we are going to be learning about concrete projects for individual Compact countries. In other words, of course, we are going to be learning more about your countries. And so I would like to close by quoting an African saying: “If you want to know how business is going at the market, you have to go down there.” It’s as simple as that. True, today the market is being shifted here to Berlin for us, but if we really want to know about it, then, yes, we need to go there.

On that note: thank you very much, particularly to our guests who have travelled a long way. I hope we will all enjoy a successful conference.
Mr Watanabe,
Mr Nishimura,
Mr Takashima,
Ms Bosse,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

First of all, I would like to thank you very much for the friendly introduction and for the opportunity to be your guest here today. It is an honour to me to be hosted here by Asahi Shimbun. You are one of the most widely circulated newspapers in the world, and your publishing house is also rich in tradition, with a history extending back to the early days of Japanese-German relations.

Exactly 142 years ago today, on 9 March 1873, what was known as the Iwakura Mission arrived in Berlin. This Japanese delegation headed by Ambassador Extraordinary Tomomi Iwakura undertook an extensive educational journey in order to gain greater insight into the economic, political and social life of European countries. In my view the Iwakura Mission is, in a manner of speaking, exemplary of Japanese open-mindedness and thirst for knowledge – a tradition the country has maintained to this day. This tradition is one of the foundations of the host of close ties between the German and Japanese people.

Whether in business or science, art or culture, there is no other country in Asia with which Germany maintains such intense exchange. This exchange is supported, for example, by 60 town twinning partnerships and more than 110 Japanese-German and German-Japanese societies in our countries. The Junior Sports Club and the many students and university graduates who take part in the Japan Exchange and Teaching Programme are also especially notable bridge-builders between our countries.

Among the many institutions that stimulate exchange between our countries, I would especially like to single out the Japanese-German Center Berlin. This centre was founded 30 years ago at the initiative of Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone and Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl. Many conferences, cultural events and exchange programmes have since been carried out. The JGCB also helped organise today’s event. For this reason, I would like to express my heartfelt thanks to all the people at this centre who are doing outstanding work in the service of lively Japanese-German dialogue.

Ladies and gentlemen, the day after tomorrow is the fourth anniversary of the major Tohoku earthquake on 11 March 2011. The earthquake triggered a tremendously devastating tsunami and failures at several nuclear power plants, especially the Fukushima nuclear power plant. The terrible images of the destruction and suffering caused by this threefold catastrophe in 2011 are still vivid in my mind. Our deepest condolences go out to all those who lost loved ones in this disaster. Our sympathy is also with those who survived but have still not been able to return to their homes. I greatly admire the spirit of community with which the Japanese people have tackled the reconstruction after the earthquake.

Destruction and reconstruction are also key words for 2015 in another way, as this year we are commemorating the 70th anniversary of the end of the Second World War. To echo the words of former Federal President Richard von Weizsäcker, who died just a few weeks ago, the end of the war in Europe on 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation – liberation from Nazi barbarism, from the horrors of the Second World War that had been unleashed by Germany, and from the betrayal of all civilised values in the form of the Shoah.

We Germans will never forget the hand of reconciliation that was extended to us after all the suffering that our country had brought to Europe and the world. We can count ourselves lucky that so much trust was placed in the nascent Federal Republic at that time. This is what it made it possible for us to succeed in finding our way back into the international community. Trust was also what cleared the way to German unity for us four decades later after the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of the East-West confrontation in 1989-1990.

Today, 70 years after the end of the Second World War and 25 years after the end of the Cold War, we in Germany can – just like Japan – look back on developments that have taken a remarkable course. As prosperous democracies, our states and societies are deeply marked by the separation of powers, the rule of law, and the principles of the social market economy. Our economic strengths are rooted in our capacity for reform, competition and innovation. As trade- and export-oriented nations, our free and open civil societies thrive on a globalised economy. Germany and Japan are thus partners in global responsibility for a liberal, standards-based world order of free, open states and societies.

But this liberal world order is not to be taken for granted. On the contrary, it is threatened. By annexing Crimea in violation of international law and supporting separatists in eastern Ukraine, Russia has violated the territorial integrity of Ukraine, which it clearly committed itself to protecting in the Budapest Memorandum in 1994. Ukraine, like every other state, has the right to determine its own path with full sovereignty. I would like to thank the Japanese Government very much for the fact that we are taking this position together and have also imposed economic sanctions as a necessary response.

But we are also focused on a diplomatic solution. This is a reason why I am working together with French President François Hollande, all of our European and transatlantic partners, and Japan to see that the agreements that were made a few weeks ago in Minsk to overcome the crisis are truly implemented. Free local elections in eastern Ukraine and unimpeded Ukrainian control of the country’s own borders would, by the way, not only help Ukraine and enable it to regain its territorial integrity, but also lend new impetus to the partnership with Russia. Of course, the Crimea issue cannot simply remain unresolved.

Japan and Germany have shared interests when it comes to enforcing the strength of international law – including stability in other regions, such as waterways and trade routes in the East and South China Seas, the security of which we believe is threatened by maritime territorial disputes. These waterways connect Europe with this part of the world, among other things. Their security therefore also affects us in Europe. In order to reach a viable solution, I believe it is very important to make use of regional forums such as ASEAN in addition to bilateral efforts, and also to overcome differences on the basis of international maritime law: including both smaller and larger partners in multilateral processes and basing potential agreements on internationally recognised law ensures transparency and reliability. And transparency and reliability are vital requirements for preventing misunderstandings, prejudices and crises.

In our world, however, we are also confronted with conflicts where the willingness to enter into dialogue runs up against limits because fundamental values and human rights are violated in an atrocious manner. We are experiencing this with the international terrorism that is raging in Syria, Iraq, Libya, and large swathes of Nigeria. The terrorist organisations IS and Boko Haram threaten to annihilate everyone and everything that does not fit with their own maniacal claims to power. IS’s horrific murder of two Japanese hostages, the assassination of cartoonists and journalists of the satirical French newspaper Charlie Hebdo, and the gruesome attack on customers at a kosher supermarket in Paris – these and unfortunately many other barbaric crimes strengthen us more than ever in our determination to stand up resolutely together for freedom and open-mindedness. Such attacks make us, including Germany and Japan, stand even closer together in the fight against hatred and contempt for humanity.

That is why we are using the German G7 Presidency as an opportunity to stanch the flow of funding and combatants into international terrorism. Above all, finance ministers are engaged with this project. We are politically and militarily supporting all those who are opposing IS terror on the ground, especially the new Iraqi Government and the Kurdish Regional Government. Together with Japan, we are also helping to relieve the suffering which refugees are experiencing because of IS terror. This is our humanitarian responsibility, and fulfilling this responsibility is also in our own security policy interest.

Both of these approaches were also decisive in Germany’s and Japan’s engagement in Afghanistan. Together, we built up and assisted Afghan security forces. We helped create a school system and a health system, and we helped build new roads. On the whole we can say that life in Afghanistan has improved since 2001, even if the everyday security situation for people in Afghanistan remains unsatisfactory. We have, however, achieved the most important goal: today an international terrorist threat no longer emanates from Afghanistan.

Beyond this, Japan and Germany also agree on the task of containing the threat posed by nuclear weapons. The year 2015 marks the 70th anniversary of the dreadful atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The memory of these horrors has given rise to a responsibility for the future: such a thing must never happen again. That is why Japan and Germany are working tirelessly for greater disarmament and arms control.

This is also why we are pursuing the shared goal of preventing Iran from acquiring nuclear weapons. All doubts about the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme must be cleared up. The talks to this end are currently in a decisive phase. What is at stake for us is not just mitigating a source of regional conflict, but also the larger question of how we can prevent an arms race and the proliferation of nuclear weapons. In this context, of course, North Korea also has to be mentioned. 

An existential question like this one shows how important international partnerships’ and organisations’ credibility and capacity to act are. That is why Japan and Germany have joined Brazil and India in advocating the strengthening of the United Nations – including reforms to the Security Council – even if progress admittedly proceeds at a very slow pace. We are, however, convinced that every region of the world should participate appropriately in Security Council decisions so that we can preserve a chance for peace and stability in the world.

Within the circle of G7 countries, too, we face global challenges, and we do so – this is a hallmark of the G7 – on a foundation of shared values and convictions. In the coming year Japan will take over the G7 Presidency from Germany. That is why we, Japan and Germany, want to work hand in hand especially closely.

The areas of focus for the German G7 Presidency include international climate protection. I have singled out this example because the year 2015 will be especially significant for climate protection. In December the UN conference in Paris will determine whether we will be able to have an ambitious and binding climate treaty enter into force in 2020. That is why we want to work with our G7 partners to prepare initiatives that will show that the G7 states are ready to take on a leading role in low‑carbon development. We want to make clear that this does not mean having to sacrifice prosperity. Prosperity must be attained in a different way than it has been to date, but we need not forsake it. We want to advance relevant innovations around the world, and what we want to do above all in this pursuit is assist developing countries. In any event, I hope that the G7 summit in Germany in June will send a strong signal in support of the successful conclusion of the climate negotiations in Paris.

Closely connected with climate protection is the question of how we can ensure the most sustainable energy supply possible. To this end, we want to keep developing the G7 initiative for energy security. This is a matter of creating the most transparent and functional energy markets that are possible. It is also our aim to increase energy efficiency and thereby reduce energy costs.

Other themes of Germany’s G7 Presidency include health issues such as the lessons learnt from the Ebola epidemic and the topic of women’s independence and professional training in developing countries.

Cooperation between Japan and Germany in a multilateral framework is only one side of the coin. The other side, which is of course just as important, is our bilateral partnership. Because we face quite similar challenges, we can learn a lot from and with each other. One excellent example is the answers we are seeking for demographic shifts in our societies. We are grappling with very similar questions when it comes to this issue. How do we keep our social security systems effective without overburdening the younger generation? How can we create good living conditions in rural regions that are affected by depopulation? How do we keep an aging society dynamic and innovative? – I have just discussed this with scholars who are working intensely in Japanese-German research areas. – How do we secure the pool of skilled workers that we need in order to preserve our prosperity?

We in Germany are engaged with these and many other questions as part of the Federal Government’s demographic strategy. We are focusing, for example, on increasing the workforce participation of women, improving the compatibility of work and family, extending our working lifetimes, and attracting qualified employees from abroad. Freedom of movement in the European Union creates good opportunities for workers from other European countries to come to Germany. But workers from countries outside Europe are also interested, and we are improving immigration conditions for them.

Here in Japan, the Government is seeking to encourage women’s workforce participation under the slogan “Let Women Shine”. There is also a legislative package to introduce quotas for the proportion of women in businesses and public administration. In Germany, the Bundestag adopted such a law on Friday after lengthy discussion. A look at the statistics regarding women in leadership positions in companies in Germany and Japan shows that both countries still have some catching up to do. I am looking forward to speaking tomorrow with Japanese women in leadership positions about their experiences and career paths. What is clear is that demographic change makes fostering and harnessing the potential of professionals a key factor in the future success of our countries’ economies and thus also in the preservation of our high standard of living.

Germany and Japan have long been a part of the circle of internationally successful economic players. This commonality has created a lot of space for additional forms of Japanese-German cooperation. Of course, this is above all a matter for businesses. – I am pleased that a business delegation has accompanied me on this trip in order to potentially give fresh impetus to our economic collaborations. – The politicians must create the framework conditions for these activities. This means that remaining impediments to trade, investment and joint innovation should be cleared away as much as possible.

That is why the entire Federal Government and I are working to negotiate and sign the free trade agreement between Japan and the European Union as quickly as possible. – It has been our experience that mutual trade has increased through such agreements, which has created more jobs. – Both sides can particularly benefit from even closer collaboration in technologically sophisticated areas. The challenges associated with digitalisation will surely create a variety of future opportunities for us in this area.

It is no secret that the innovative strength and success of our economy are built on a foundation of education, science and research. It is only logical, then, for our two countries to cultivate lively exchange in these areas too. We have many relationships that have grown over the years. I have already mentioned my talks with scientists this morning. What came up in this conversation is that we must pay attention: Japan is surrounded by interesting countries such as South Korea, China and Vietnam, which are developing in a highly dynamic way. That is why we should be keen to intensify our research cooperation not only in our own respective regions but also across the great distance between Germany and Japan. I am firmly convinced that a lot of good things can come out of this, and good things can become even better. In areas such as renewable energy, marine and earth sciences and environmental research, there is no shortage of opportunities for even more intensive cooperation.

That is why I would be delighted if even more students and scholars from Japan were to become interested in spending time in Germany. Many classes and training programmes in Germany are now held in English, and do not necessarily require participants to learn German. Perhaps it is possible for Japanese businesses to place more emphasis on young professionals at the start of their careers being able to boast towards participation in exchange programmes at international universities. I believe this is important for the global orientation of research and ultimately also of development. Young people should understand spending time abroad as a help and not a hindrance to their careers.

I can report from the European Union that we have the ERASMUS exchange programme there, which leads many students to spend some of their time studying abroad. I believe that the positive developments and effects this brings greatly outweigh the time that is lost through studying abroad. In any event, I can say that Japanese students and scholars are very welcome in Germany – at least as welcome as the Iwakura Mission was in 1873. Now, like then, we want to retain our curiosity about one another; now, like then, we want to explore the world together. That is why I am pleased that today I not only have had the chance to speak to you, but also can now exchange opinions in a discussion with you.

Thank you very much for this opportunity to be your guest today.

Mister President, dear François Hollande,
Presidents of the Regional Councils, Minister-Presidents, Your Eminencies, representatives of the Jewish and Muslim communities,
Mister President of the European Parliament,
Mister President of the European Commission,
Ladies and gentlemen,
and, last but not least, dear young guests,

The French lieutenant Alfred Joubaire was hardly older than you when he lay in a trench near this very spot. He wrote in his diary that “not even hell could be as horrific as this”. With these words, the young lieutenant was attempting to describe the horrors he had witnessed – they were written by a person who should have a long life before him. Only shortly afterwards, Alfred Joubaire was dead – one of the countless casualties of the battle of Verdun.

Behind us is the ossuary, which houses the mortal remains of more than 100,000 unnamed soldiers. Here, we are surrounded by an ocean of graves. To this day, the earth holds remnant bones of young Frenchmen and Germans who were robbed of their lives. The entire landscape still bears the scars of that battle. Here, history is uncomfortably close. Verdun still has us in its grip. Verdun can and must remain in our consciousness. Verdun stands for the sheer horror and senselessness of war.

At the same time, however, Verdun is a symbol of yearning for peace, of overcoming enmity, and of Franco-German reconciliation. Even in the heat of battle, there were moving and humane gestures. Wilhelm Ritter von Schramm witnessed near Verdun how German and French soldiers waved and threw rations to one another – I quote: “The French were more generous than we were. Most importantly, they handed us what we urgently needed, namely water. That’s how much fraternisation there was; it was the first fraternisation I had ever experienced, and it was not recorded in any war diary, because we made sure knowledge of this would not spread.” It is hardly possible to find a more convincing description of the absurdity of war – not only because even in the hellish environment of the battlefields of Verdun humanity could not be completely extinguished, but also because war still is possible, even though, in most people, everything bristles at the thought of it. We must always keep our eyes open for, and be alerted by, the first signs of war, so as to nip it in its bud.

After the First World War, efforts were made to create long-term peaceful coexistence in Europe. Aristide Briand and Gustav Stresemann, the foreign ministers of both countries, were even awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1926 for their endeavours. And yet, in the long run, the voices advocating reason and mutual understanding were still too weak to make themselves heard. We all know well which dark years would follow. National Socialist Germany brought indescribable suffering to Europe.

After the Second World War and the Holocaust, it was more or less a miracle that the door to rapprochement and reconciliation was opened by the signing of the Élysée Treaty in 1963. The bonds of trust established by French President Charles de Gaulle and Federal Chancellor Konrad Adenauer are invaluable, and they have been passed down to us. More than two decades later, French President François Mitterrand and Federal Chancellor Helmut Kohl stood, side by side and holding hands, at the graves of Verdun. This gesture says more than any words could express. It was and still is an expression of deeply-felt solidarity.

And today, again, we jointly commemorate the many who died at Verdun. All of them fell victim to the same aberrations: to bigotry and nationalism, to delusion and political failure. The best way for us to honour the memory of the victims is to time and again recall the lessons that Europe has drawn from the cataclysms of the 20th century: These are the ability and the willingness to realise how vitally important it is to not cut ourselves off, but to remain open-minded in all our encounters.

Of course, it may sometimes require great effort to extend a hand to others and to familiarise ourselves with their points of view. But only by opening up to one another can we also learn and benefit from each other. That precisely is the key to Europe’s success. It is particularly apparent these days, when we are also witnessing weaknesses in our community. Still, I maintain that the 21st-century challenges we face can only be tackled together.

With European integration, we have left behind us the trenches of enmity. We have gained peace and prosperity. We have overcome quite a number of crises during which we feared the many things we’ve accomplished through integration may forever be lost. After the recent Franco-German Council of Ministers, President François Hollande said: “We have always managed to overcome the obstacles in our path”. That is exactly why today, as well, despite numerous difficulties and setbacks, we can confidently set our sights on the future.

In the European Union, we will at times different opinions on certain issues. That is only natural. However, all sides will benefit if, in the end, we always prove that we are able to reach compromises and adopt common positions. Thinking and acting as pure nation states would set us back. We would not be able to successfully defend our values or promote our interests, neither internally nor abroad. This is true for overcoming the European sovereign-debt crisis, for dealing with the many people who have come to Europe seeking refuge, and for all other great present-day challenges.

We must visibly demonstrate on a daily basis our shared commitment to the fundamental values of freedom, democracy and the rule of law. France and Germany have a special obligation to uphold these values in the heart of Europe. French and German soldiers stand shoulder to shoulder in NATO. They are also engaged in joint operations: in Mali, in the Mediterranean and as part of international coalition efforts to fight the Islamic State terrorist organisation. The Franco-German Brigade, which is participating in this commemoration ceremony, embodies our close cooperation based on trust.

Ladies and gentlemen, during the battle of Verdun, Europe’s heart appeared to stop beating. By contrast, does it not fill our hearts with joy to see how, today, on this former battlefield, so many young women and men from France and Germany have gathered as a symbol of how enmity has been overcome and replaced by the present-day friendship between our two countries? This is a place of remembrance, and at the same time it is a place of hope for a bright common future.

Dear François Hollande, I want to express my heartfelt thanks for inviting me to this joint commemoration ceremony. We in Germany were deeply touched by the French Republic’s invitation to share a moment of remembrance at this historically significant and highly symbolic site. Three flags fly over this memorial: the French Tricolour; the German black, red and gold; and our common European flag. We are no longer separated by trenches. As friends, we together commemorate the past and jointly shape our future. Luckily, we now stand united. May this never change.

Thank you.
Ms Schmider,

Mr Philipp,

Mr Bader,

Mr Schmidt,

Ms Amanpour,

Ambassador Grenell,

Ladies and gentlemen,

Members of the Fulbright community,

Esteemed guests,



This is a moving moment. I would like to thank you for – in some cases – making a very long journey to pay tribute to me here and thus in part also to Germany.



You have choreographed this event in a wonderful way. In Mr Pauser, someone from my constituency is here with us. Greifswald is part of this constituency. There are truly moving stories about how it is possible today that a town – admittedly, a venerable Hanseatic town, but all the same, a town in Western Pomerania – is embedded in the world. Then of course, we had the welcome from Renée Fleming, whose voice means so much to me. It is wonderful to have her here with us too. And I would also like to thank you for your kind words, my dear Ms Amanpour. We normally only see each other on television and mostly from a distance. Thank you for being here today and for explaining my political work.



The Fulbright Prize shows how important international understanding is. As one would say in mathematics, understanding alone is not enough, but it is necessary, for peaceful coexistence, on both a small and large scale. As a young scholarship student in Oxford, William Fulbright experienced for himself how empathy and trust can ultimately be created across borders and continents when people meet and listen to each other. On the basis of this experience, he launched a programme shortly after the Second World War that is one of the most successful exchange programmes we have to this day.



I think that we need to keep picturing this time shortly after the end of the Second World War. It was actually a time when we could have expected hatred and ill will to gain the upper hand. However, there were people – and we benefit from their work to this day – who made reconciliation and understanding possible in this situation, which was catastrophic for Germans because of what they had caused.



Understanding and empathy can be fostered by countries and programmes, but they cannot be prescribed. That is why we always need people who are open to others and to their views and experiences. We need school pupils, students, professors and professionals of all kinds who have the courage to be open to new things, to learn foreign languages, and to live, work and create a life for themselves in other countries. What an achievement it is when that succeeds, particularly if new acquaintances become new friends.



Such experiences have a life-long impact. They promote openness towards other cultures, affinity with other countries, and a sense of gratitude for having had the opportunity to broaden one’s horizons. When you are somewhere else, you can no longer hold tight to your prejudices, but instead have to live with reality. As we all know, it is far more difficult to say certain things to someone’s face than to say them from a distance. Now in particular, I think such experiences must be put back on the agenda and discussed among us, as those who are open to other countries and people are perceived there as ambassadors who personify life in their home country. Conversely, those who return home bring with them a wealth of newly acquired experiences, which they can share with others.



This means that each and every successful exchange helps our countries to learn about and understand one another. Every contact and friendship forms a link in the chain of international relations. Senator Fulbright firmly believed in such citizen diplomacy – in the idea that it is not only politicians and diplomats who foster peace, but above all citizens who establish and maintain friendly relations with people in other countries.



It is so easy to say this. But a great cultural achievement, one that Americans and Germans in particular constantly demonstrate, is behind this open-mindedness. For example, many US citizens regard Germany as a second home. In Berlin alone, there are some 20,000 Americans. There are 10,000 German students at US universities and even more young Americans, namely 12,600 people, studying here in Germany. Americans and Germans study, research and work together. In this way, they breathe life into and renew our relations every day.



The Fulbright Program plays a crucial role in this. The exchange with Germany is particularly intensive. To date, the Fulbright Commission has awarded over 46,000 grants to Germans and Americans, thus showing the great mutual interest between the two countries. It is certainly no coincidence that the United States and Germany are united by partnership and friendship – and have been for over 70 years now.



The Fulbright Program started as far back as 1946, only a year after the end of the Second World War. That year, then US Secretary of State James Francis Byrnes gave a speech in Germany – this was in 1946 – that ended as follows and I quote: “The American people want to return the government of Germany to the German people. The American people want to help the German people to win their way back to an honourable place among the free and peace-loving nations of the world.” These words became known as the “speech of hope” – hope for a future for a country that had been destroyed by a war it had unleashed itself; hope for a country whose statehood, economy and ethical principles lay in ruins.



But why should this country, a former enemy that had caused so much suffering in the world, be helped to a better future? There was no lack of understandable concerns and doubts. But thanks to extraordinary courage and political foresight, such help was provided. Germany was to take its fate back into its own hands. It was to build up a democracy. It was to become a partner that was part of a free and flourishing European reality. Our country thus had the privilege of experiencing how important faith and trust are. That is what the United States and the other Western Allies gave Germany, in word and deed. The Fulbright Program expresses this.



I would also like to take this opportunity to recall the Marshall Plan and the many Allied soldiers who were stationed in Germany during the Cold War. Let us recall the Berlin Airlift, which brought vital supplies to the blockaded city 70 years ago and kept its hope for freedom alive. And we shall never forget the legendary show of support from US President John F. Kennedy who said “Ich bin ein Berliner.”



9 November 2019 will mark the thirtieth anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall. We are gathered here in a symbolic venue, close to the Brandenburg Gate. This gate, which was closed for decades and has now been open for almost 30 years, is a symbol of Berlin’s freedom, German reunification, the end of the division of Europe and the fact that all this could be achieved because our US friends tirelessly supported a free Europe and made this Europe strong. We Germans will not forget this.



When I was in Washington recently for a sad occasion, the funeral of George Bush, we had an opportunity to recall that among the Western Allies, it was George Bush who, along with Helmut Kohl, was the main proponent of German unity and offered us a partnership in leadership at the time.



All of that is our past, which is also part of our present. But we also see that the transatlantic partnership does not enjoy the same level of acceptance among the young generation as it does among older people. We see that the security-policy priorities have changed – and with good reason – from the US point of view in particular. The Pacific region is just as challenging as the European region. Relations shifted after the end of the Cold War.



Naturally – and by the way, that was also the case in the past – we do not always agree as regards how we see and balance national and international interests. But allow me to point out that Germany has gradually taken on more responsibility, particularly since the end of the Cold War. Ms Amanpour just reminded us how things were when the first German troops arrived in Kosovo. At the time, I was a junior member of the Federal Government. We had tough discussions on whether to deploy ships to the Adriatic Sea to observe what was happening in the Western Balkans. Today, it is completely normal for us to serve with our allies not only in the Western Balkans, but also in Afghanistan, in order to defend the United States’ interests and our own interests for the first time under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty. We are in Africa, in Mali. And we know that we need to do even more. We want to take on responsibility. And we will do so. This can be seen in the increasing budgets both for security expenditure and development aid. It is our common security that we need and want to defend because we also want to protect our values.



But 80 years after the outbreak of the Second World War, the lessons from the past seem to be fading and to have lost some of their impact. We have among us fewer and fewer eye-witnesses to the inconceivable crimes that Germans committed during the Nazi period. There are now fewer and fewer survivors of the enormous avalanche of destruction that an inhuman ideology triggered.



That is why those of us in positions of responsibility today must remind people of the lessons of what the world experienced in the First and Second World Wars. We must take on responsibility to ensure that peace is preserved. We can count ourselves lucky today that we can live in peace and freedom in our countries. But we must remember that we cannot take this for granted and constantly need to work for it. We must remain vigilant – vigilant as regards social developments in and outside our countries.



We are experiencing – and this forms part of the analysis of our current time – populism and xenophobic nationalism in many countries, including here in Germany. We see that thinking in terms of national spheres of influence is on the rise and that principles of international law or human rights are being challenged as a result. We must take a resolute stance against this.



We should and must remember why the United Nations, the World Trade Organization and other international institutions were founded. They were founded because of the lessons from the horrors of Nazism, the Second World War and rampant nationalism. Working together – multilateralism – was the answer to the horrors of the first half of the twentieth century. That continues to apply in full today, at least to my mind. We need international rules in order to resolve conflicting interests peacefully.



That is why we need international institutions that are able to act. Naturally, these international institutions must also be able to respond to new challenges. They must be capable of reform and they must continue to develop, as the challenges we face as the international community also change over time. These are challenges that I firmly believe cannot be met by countries going it alone. These are challenges for which we all bear a duty and a responsibility. We cannot act – no country can – as if these challenges have nothing to do with us, and I also mean Germany here, or as if they were a matter of fate and thus something we can do nothing to change. No, globalisation, digital transformation and economic development are made by humans. Climate change, wars and crises are also caused by humans, so we can and should do everything we can as humans to truly tackle these and other common challenges together.



That is why I want people to understand that in this world of ours, which is interconnected in so many ways, it is possible to find national common good in the global common good. Naturally, every country has its own political priorities. But global necessities and national interests certainly do not have to be in opposing camps. On the contrary, I firmly believe that working on behalf of the global common good also has positive repercussions for the national common good. In my opinion, patriotism means always considering one’s own interests along with those of others. That is why I will keep striving for the multilateral, values and rules-based world order to be strengthened.



Ladies and gentlemen, that also holds true for the European Union. It, too, was founded because of the lessons from the horrors of the twentieth century. One might say that Europe is also a multilateral project. Germany will only fare well in the long term if Europe fares well. I firmly believe that the idea of European integration is the best idea we have ever had on our continent.



Naturally, we have also had to face setbacks on the path to further developing the European Union. I regard the decision by the people of the United Kingdom to leave the European Union as one of these setbacks. But this decision must be respected. That is why we will do our utmost to have good relations based on mutual trust with our neighbouring country after the United Kingdom leaves the European Union. Theresa May has rightfully said that her country will remain part of Europe. We want to ensure that our relations in the business sector, between our civil societies, in the security field, the foreign-policy field and many other areas are close.



Naturally, Europe can also be a drag. I have spent enough nights dealing with that and trying to reach an outcome in negotiations. But time and again we have proved that we are able to reach compromises. In this way, we repeatedly find workable answers together to questions with which each individual country would be out of its depth on its own.



Ladies and gentlemen, we are currently talking again about matters that seem to be a matter of course. The value of compromise is one of the things we are discussing. We should hold compromises in high regard, as they are essential if people are to live together. We could say that it’s too complicated for us to do something in Europe, so let’s do it in Germany. But then we would realise that the federation and Länder also need nights of talks to reach agreement. And if we then said that we would only negotiate at the level of Federal Government, we would discover that coalition committee meetings would go on late into the night. If we ultimately said that we don’t need any compromises whatsoever, including outside the political sphere, then we only need to think about how the average family plans its weekends and imagine what would happen. Without compromise, lunch would never get made. Without compromise, there can be no community. That means that if someone ultimately wants to be completely alone, they don’t have to make compromises, unless they have a split personality. But as soon as they want to live with someone, they will have to compromise.



Ladies and gentlemen, in this world of change, Europe can only be strong and able to assert its values freely and of its own accord if it is united. And as a partner to and friend of the United States, Europe can only be as strong as it is united. The transatlantic partnership is based on a foundation of shared values – on democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms. Because that is the case, we – Germany, Europe and the United States – cannot wish for better partners. Despite all our differences, which exist in any partnership, we should not forget that. Now in particular, when there is a great need for discussion in transatlantic relations, we need to communicate and we need paths that lead to one another.



One way we want to forge such paths is through the Deutschlandjahr USA, which we are currently holding in the United States. Under the motto “Wunderbar together”, our aim is to speak with as many Americans as possible. The over 1000 events are not just being held in large cities, but across the entire country.



Like Senator Fulbright, I firmly believe that people-to-people contacts are what make the countries of this world a true international community. The Fulbright Program has thus proved to be a blessing, not only for generations of scholars, but also for our international relations. That is why I can merely repeat that it is a great pleasure and honour for me to be awarded the Fulbright Prize for International Understanding. The fact that this prize was first awarded to Nelson Mandela makes it an even greater honour.



And moreover, the fact that this award ceremony is taking place in Germany means that many of you have come a long way to be here today. I would like to thank you for that. And I would also like to say that perhaps Senator Fulbright is more contemporary today than he has been in quite some time. It is good that he was with us and that we are paying tribute to him today.



Thank you very much indeed.

Secretary-General Ban,
President Erdogan,
Ladies and gentlemen,

Conflicts and disasters cause immeasurable suffering and create new challenges for humanitarian assistance. The truth is that to this day we do not have a sustainable humanitarian system. Many people are thus following our meeting here in Istanbul very closely. For this reason, I would like to thank the UN Secretary-General for taking on this painful topic and, after carefully preparing the Summit, launching our efforts today. I would like to thank Turkey for its hospitality and for making it possible to hold this Summit here in Istanbul.

What do we need?

Firstly, we need a renewed global consensus on humanitarian principles. It is actually a disaster in itself that we have to talk about the need to respect international law. Nevertheless, we are seeing in Syria, Yemen and elsewhere that hospitals are being systematically bombed, health centres destroyed and doctors killed. Such actions are a flagrant breach of humanitarian principles. We must be successful in getting help to the places where it is needed. We must be successful in ensuring humanitarian work can be carried out on the ground. We must all work together to achieve this end.

Secondly, the priority has to be to make aid function as smoothly as possible. We must not simply go from one situation to the next, from one disaster to the next. What we need is a cohesive system of humanitarian aid. Above all, we need those supporting humanitarian assistance to be reliable. Many a pledge is made without the money arriving in the project. That must change.

Germany supports the proposal to increase the volume of the Central Emergency Response Fund to one billion US dollars. Also on the German side, we are going to spend more money on humanitarian assistance. We need operative crisis facilities and not just action when disaster strikes.

Thirdly, we need to break new ground. We need to learn from one another here. Every time we need to identify and implement the most efficient and best methods. I would advocate that we also give insurance models a chance alongside classic financing, for example, insurance models connected to the risks associated with climate change or global epidemics. The advantage is that assistance can be given quickly. Those with an insurance claim are no longer perceived as people with their hand out but as people who have claims. Insurance models could thus really bring a turnaround.

Fourthly, it is a matter of networking our activities. Prevention, development cooperation and implementing Agenda 2030 that was adopted last year have to go hand in hand. Today, monocausal explanations of conflicts are no longer valid. Conflicts have multiple causes – from climate change to hunger, civil war and many other factors. That is why we need to tackle the problem from different angles. And that is why the tools need to be dovetailed.

Today the implementation of an inclusive system for global action is being launched to help people in need and to make clear: We all live on one planet, we all have one life, we all have the right to live this life sustainably and sensibly. That is why we need to give everyone opportunities. There are too many today who do not have these opportunities.

Thank you very much for organising this Summit.
Federal President,
Mr Graumann,
Mr Lauder,
Cardinal Marx,
Mr Schneider,
Governing Mayor Wowereit,
Excellencies,
Ladies and gentlemen,

The fact that today there are again more than 100,000 Jews living in Germany is nothing short of a miracle. It’s a precious gift which fills me with profound gratitude.

That people in Germany today are being verbally abused, threatened and attacked when it somehow becomes apparent that they are Jewish or when they express their support for the State of Israel, is outrageous.

That is something I cannot accept. No-one present here today is prepared to accept that – and there are many; many who share my sentiments.

It pains me when I hear that young Jewish parents are asking whether they can raise their children in Germany, or that older people are asking whether it was right to stay here.

With this rally we want to send out the clear message that Jewish life belongs in our country. It’s part of our identity and culture.

We’re sending out the clear message that there’s no place in our country for discrimination and exclusion. Anyone who discriminates against or excludes others will find themselves up against me and everyone here, indeed the vast majority of people in Germany.

We’re sending out the clear message that Germany is aware of its abiding responsibility following the Shoah, that ultimate betrayal of all civilised values, to take resolute action against anti-Semitism or – even better – to prevent it.

It’s been brought home to us once more during the last few months how vigilant we need to be.

We can see through the perfidious intentions of anti-Semitism: Jewish people are to be made outsiders in our country. And our response is clear: Jewish friends, neighbours and colleagues – Germany is your home.

On behalf of the entire German Government, I condemn every form of anti-Semitism in either Germany or Europe in the strongest possible terms. I utterly reject all anti-Semitic comments and attacks – not least those witnessed recently at pro-Palestinian demonstrations, which were supposedly criticism of the policies of the State of Israel but which were actually purely and simply expressions of hate directed against Jewish people.

It’s especially intolerable when anti-Semitic slogans are drummed into children, who then chant them at demonstrations of this kind.

Anyone who uses completely legitimate criticism of political actions – either those of our own country or of the State of Israel – at demonstrations merely as a pretext to give expression to their hate of other people, their hate of Jews, is misusing our precious fundamental rights to freedom of opinion and of assembly.

Anyone who verbally abuses or hits someone wearing a kippa or a Star of David, or even inflicts such serious injuries on someone that they have to be treated in hospital, is hitting and injuring us all.

Anyone who desecrates gravestones in Jewish cemeteries, debases our culture.

Anyone who makes synagogues a target of hate and violence shakes the very foundations of our free society.

We have heard comments which amount to a declaration of war on the harmonious relations between the different communities and faiths within our society.

We have witnessed crimes which constitute an attack on our freedom and human dignity.

We must not, and indeed cannot, look away. And we will not look away. That’s why we’re here today.

And not only that – it’s the duty of our state and of every citizen to fight anti-Semitism.

That’s why our security authorities take every attack on Jews or Jewish institutions very seriously. Let me say that they must be taken very seriously – each and every case. Anti-Semitic crimes are vigorously prosecuted with the full force of the law.

Incidentally, that also applies to attacks on mosques. We don’t tolerate them either, they too are vigorously prosecuted.

First and foremost, however, we have to ensure that such attacks aren’t carried out in the first place.

That is a task for every one of us. It is in line with our joint sense of responsibility for the common good. It requires courage and everyone’s own initiative, solidarity, tolerance and open-mindedness – those values which make a society humane and fit to face the challenges of the future; values which have to be impressed on us all time and again.

My Government is supporting a wide range of activities to this end: projects which foster tolerance and strengthen social competences and an understanding of democracy; especially in the work with young people and parents. For if we want to uproot all forms of extremist and ideological discrimination and violence, we have to start with the family.

We encourage young people and adults to engage in civil society and work in the community. We’re investing in education and promoting memorials. This includes ensuring that remembrance and knowledge of the darkest chapter in German history, the unparalleled negation of civilisation that was the Shoah, are handed down from generation to generation.

We owe that to the victims, their descendants and all of us, if the welfare of our country is important to us.

We want Jewish people to feel safe in Germany. They should feel that this country is home to all of us, a home in which they, just like everyone living here, have a bright future.

By participating in this rally, all of us are sending an important signal – we’re signalling that we aren’t prepared to tolerate anti-Semitism, extremism or inhumanity.

We’re signalling our respect: our respect for each other’s faith and culture – whether it be Jewish, Muslim or Christian. We are signalling our desire for peace and harmony in our society.

That’s our message. I hope it will spread to the heart of our society and to the rest of the world.

Thank you very much.
